<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />

  <title>6th Circuit Ruling in Cyberspace v. Engler,
  11/15/2000</title>
<style type="text/css">
/*<![CDATA[*/
 body {
  background-color: white;
 }
 p.c9 {font-size: 80%}
 p.c8 {font-size: 120%; font-weight: bold}
 p.c7 {font-size: 120%; font-weight: bold; text-align: left}
 p.c6 {font-size: 120%; text-align: center}
 span.c5 {font-size: 64%}
 p.c4 {font-size: 80%; font-style: italic; text-align: center}
 span.c3 {font-size: 80%}
 p.c2 {font-weight: bold}
 span.c1 {font-size: 120%}
/*]]>*/
</style>
</head>

<body>
  <table width='650' border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0">
    <tr>
      <td width="400" align="center" valign="bottom">
        <strong><br />
        <span class="c1">NOT RECOMMENDED FOR FULL-TEXT
        PUBLICATION</span></strong>

        <p class="c2"><span class="c1">No. 99-2064</span></p>
      </td>

      <td width="250" align="center" valign="bottom">
        <span class="c3"><em>[stamped]</em></span><br />
        <em>[</em> <span class="c1"><strong>FILED<br />
        NOV 15 2000</strong><br />
        LEONARD GREEN, Clerk</span> <em>]</em>

        <p class="c4">[stamped]</p>
      </td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td width="400"></td>

      <td width="250" align="center"><span class="c3"><em>[</em>
      &nbsp; NOT RECOMMENDED FOR FULL-TEXT</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td width="400" align="center" valign="top"><span class=
      "c1"><strong>UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS</strong></span></td>

      <td width="250" align="center"><span class=
      "c3">PUBLICATION</span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <table width='650' border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0">
    <tr>
      <td width="400" align="center" valign="top"><span class=
      "c1"><strong>FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT</strong></span></td>

      <td width="250" align="left">
        <table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0">
          <tr>
            <td><span class="c5">Sixth Circuit Rule 28(g) limits
            citation to specific situations.<br />
            Please see Rule 28(g) before citing in a proceeding in
            a court<br />
            in the Sixth Circuit. If cited, a copy must be served
            on other<br />
            parties and the Court.<br />
            This notice is to be prominently displayed if this
            decision<br />
            is reproduced.</span></td>

            <td valign="bottom"><em>]</em></td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <table width='550' border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0">
    <tr>
      <td width="340"></td>

      <td width="10"></td>

      <td width="200"></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top">
        <span class="c1"><br />
        CYBERSPACE COMMUNICATIONS, INC.;<br />
        ARBORNET; MARTY KLEIN; AIDS<br />
        PARTNERSHIP OF MICHIGAN; ART ON THE<br />
        NET; MARK AMERIKA OF ALT-X; WEB DEL<br />
        SOL; GLAD DAY BOOKSHOP, INC.; LITLINE;<br />
        AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION,</span>

        <p class="c6">Plaintiffs-Appellees,</p>

        <p class="c7">v.</p>
      </td>

      <td><span class="c1">&nbsp;<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )</span></td>

      <td valign="bottom" align="center">
        <span class="c1">&nbsp;<br />
        &nbsp;<br />
        &nbsp;<br />
        ON APPEAL FROM THE<br />
        UNITED STATES DISTRICT<br />
        COURT FOR THE EASTERN<br />
        DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN</span>

        <p class="c8">MEMORANDUM<br />
        OPINION</p>
      </td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td width="300"></td>

      <td width="10"></td>

      <td width="240"></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top">
        <span class="c1">JOHN ENGLER, Governor of the State of
        Michigan;<br />
        JENNIFER M. GRANHOLM, Attorney General of the<br />
        State of Michigan,</span>

        <p class="c6">Defendants-Appellants.</p>
      </td>

      <td><span class="c1">)<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )<br />
      )</span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <p class="c2">BEFORE: GUY and NORRIS, Circuit Judges; HOOD,
  District Judge.*</p>

  <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; <strong>PER CURIAM.</strong> Plaintiffs, Cyberspace
  Communications, Inc.; Arbornet; Marty Klein; Aids<br />
  Partnership of Michigan; Art on the Net; Mark Amerika of Alt-X;
  Web Del Sol; Glad Day<br />
  Bookshop, Inc.; Litline; and American Civil Liberti es Union,
  filed suit against John Engler,<br />
  Governor of the State of Michigan, and Jennifer M. Granholm,
  Attorney General of the State of<br />
  Michigan, challenging the constitutionality of 1999 Mich. Pub.
  Act 33, and seeking to enjoin its<br />
  enforcemen t. The Act amended an existing statutory prohibition
  against distribution of obscene<br />
  materials to children by adding computers and the Internet as
  prohibited means of distribution, and<br />
  by replacing references to "obscene matter" with "sexually
  explicit matter." The district court granted<br />
  a preliminary injunction enjoining enforcement of 1999 Mich. Pub.
  Act 33.</p>

  <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; In the course of its opinion, the district court
  concluded that "the Act offends the guarantee<br />
  of free speech in the First Amendment and is, therefore,
  unconstitutional." It also appears to have<br />
  decided that the Act violates the Commerce Clause. Since final
  conclusions on the ultimate issues<br />
  involved in the lawsuit are premature and inappropriate at this
  stage of the district court proceedings,<br />
  we must assume that the district court was speaking tentatively
  only, in the context of viewing the<br />
  likelihood of plaintiffs' ultimate success on the merits of their
  claims. Indeed, the final paragraphs<br />
  of the opinion speak in those terms.</p>

  <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Because the district court cited and relied upon
  opinions of the United States Supreme Court<br />
  that arguably support its conclusion that plaintiffs would likely
  succeed on the merits of their claim,<br />
  we are unable to say that the district court abused its
  discretion when it granted the preliminary<br />
  injunction.</p>

  <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Accordingly, we affirm the order of the district
  court granting the preliminary injunction and<br />
  remand this cause for further proceedings. Upon remand, the
  parties will be afforded the opportunity<br />
  to argue the merits of plaintiffs' claims.</p>

  <p>_________________________________</p>

  <p class="c9">*The Honorable Joseph M. Hood, United States
  Distrtict Judge for the Eastern District of Kentucky, sitting
  by<br />
  designation.</p>
</body>
</html>
