.\"	@(#)sumcheck.8	
.\"
.TH SUMCHECK 8 "May 1, 2001"
.AT 3
.SH NAME
sumcheck \- check, repair or generate a Backtalk conference summary file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sumcheck
[-cusnfri] confdir [sumfile]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Sumcheck
is a utility for checking, repairing or generating sum files for Backtalk,
Picospan or Yapp conferences.  It is mainly a debug and error recovery tool,
since all of these programs normally create and maintain summary files
automatically.  You only need this if they screw up.
.PP
The summary file resides in the conference directory and is normally called
'sum'.  It contains a header followed by one block of data for each item
in the conference.  It is used by the conferencing programs to rapidly
determine which items have had new activity.  All the information in it
is derived from other data stored in the conference directory.
.PP
By default, the sumcheck program examines the existing sum file in the
given conference directory, and compares it to the actual items stored there.
If it detects any inconsistancies it prints a message describing them.
Normally it checks against the file named 'sum' in the given conference
directory, but you can name a different file if you wish.
.PP
If the
.B \-u 
update flag is given,
any errors found will be repaired by modifying the sum file.
If the
.B \-c
create flag is given and the sum file does not already exist, it is created.
This implies
.BR \-u .
.PP
The
.B \-s
silent surpresses the printing of messages describing the differences.
Note that
.I sumcheck
will always return a non-zero return code if any errors were found.
.PP
The other flags supress various kinds of error checking.
The
.B \-i
flag is the most useful of these.
It suppresses checking of item creation dates, which Picospan and Backtalk
sometimes handle differently - Backtalk extracts the date stored in the
item file for response 0 (the item text), while Picospan seems to at least
sometimes use the file creation date.  The difference mostly doesn't matter.
Note that this flag suppress both the detection and repair of such errors.
.PP
Similarly, the
.B \-n
flag suppress checks on the numbers of responses,
the
.B \-f
flag suppresses checks on the flags, and
the
.B \-r
flag suppresses checks on the last response date.
.SH AUTHORS
Jan Wolter
(backtalk@hvcn.org)
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR dumpsum (8)
