<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />
  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />
  <script type="text/javascript"></script>
  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/default.css";
  </style>
  <title>Privacy on Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a><span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span> Staff Notes: Authentication on Grex</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="../grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="../newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="../faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="../member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="../contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <p>Authentication on Grex is handled using the standard tools
    that come with the OpenBSD operating system.  In particular, we
    use the OpenBSD
    <a href="http://www.openbsd.org/cgi-bin/man.cgi?query=bcrypt"><em>bcrypt</em></a>(3)
    hashing algorithm, and the standard 4.4BSD /etc/master.passwd
    database and its Berkeley DB counterparts, all managed using
    the tools that come with the base operating system.</p>

    <p>In the past, however, authentication on Grex was very complex.
    Grex used a proprietary algorithm and format for its hashed
    passwords and used a heavily modified version of the software that
    maintains the Unix /etc/passwd file under SunOS.  Special tools
    had to be used to work on the password database, which was very
    inconvenient.  See <a href="sun/passwd.xhtml">the old staff notes</a>
    for more information, </p>

    <p>When Grex moved to OpenBSD from SunOS, it was decided that it
    was too much effort to maintain support for the custom hashing
    algorithm that had been used for passwords on Grex.  So, the system
    was migrated to use the standard OpenBSD algorithm and tools
    instead.</p>

    <p>Migrating from the old system to the new system was remarkably
    easy, but time consuming.  Since passwords are hashed in a format
    that is difficult to invert, we could not simply "decrypt" them
    and rehash them using <em>bcrypt</em>(3).  Further, we knew that
    asking every user on Grex to change his or her password simply
    would not work.</p>

    <p>So, we came up with a different plan.  The program that creates
    new accounts on Grex was modified to use the OpenBSD algorithm, and
    then the <em>passwd</em>(1) program was updated to always use bcrypt
    when a user changed his or her their password.  Finally, the program
    that authenticates a user's password was modified so that, if it
    detected that a password was hashed with the old format, it would
    rehash the password (which it had access to) in the new format and
    update the database accordingly.</p>

    <p>The bulk of users had been migrated to the OpenBSD algorithm
    over the course of about six months; picking up the rest of the
    stragglers took about a year.  Grex is now free of the proprietary
    algorithm, account maintenance is much easier, and upgrades are
    simpler.</p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: authentication.xhtml 1547 2016-09-25 14:57:21Z kentn $</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
