<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Account Creation &amp; Connectivity on Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Connectivity and New Account Creation</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
   <ol>
   <li>You can connect to the <q>Grex</q> server and create a new 
     account, or login with your existing loginID and password, using 
     the following programs:
      <ul>
      <li><a href="#connect_browser">Internet Browser</a> - easy,
        secure, with limited access to Grex services unless you have
        Java (JRE) installed</li>
      <li><a href="#connect_ssh">SSH</a> - easy, secure, complete; may
        require extra configuration</li>
   </ul></li>

   <li>After UNIX account creation you need to validate your account -
     this is an extra step designed to prevent abuse. Type:
     <tt>validate</tt> and follow the instructions provided.</li>
   </ol>
   <hr />

   <h2 id="connect_browser">Internet Web Browser Access</h2>
     <p>Use our 
     <a href="newuser/index.xhtml">web based account creation link</a> to 
     create a new account. Note: our web based account creation
     software is not ready at this time.  The link will take you to
     instructions for using ssh to set up an account. </p>

     <p>You can access the <q>Grex</q>
     <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bulletin_board_system"
     class="external">BBS</a> by clicking on
     <a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk">Backtalk</a> -
     <strong>Agora</strong> is our frequently read conference
     (forum).</p>

     <p>If you want complete access to Grex using a web browser you 
     need to <a href="trouble/installjre.xhtml">install Java</a>
     (<acronym title="Java Runtime Environment">JRE</acronym> - Java
     Runtime Environment). You can then access the Grex Unix shell by
     clicking on the
     <a href="https://grex.org/mindterm/applet.html">MindTerm applet link</a> 
     within your browser - a Java applet (program) called
     <a href="http://www.cryptzone.com/products/agmindterm/" 
     class="external">MindTerm</a> is loaded by your web browser. This 
     Java-applet is used by your browser to connect to our <q>Grex</q> 
     server's SSH port. If it doesn't work, read our
     <a href="trouble/troubleshoot.xhtml">troubleshooting Grex connectivity</a> page.</p>

   <h2 id="connect_ssh">SSH Access</h2>
    <p>SSH is a program for making secure connections to remote,
    terminal-oriented services.  It encrypts the data sent between
    it and a remote server (such as Grex), and is capable of
    authenticating users using public key encryption.  Using SSH
    in one form or another is the only way to get interactive access
    to Grex's shell services.</p>

    <ul>
    <li>Windows 2000, Windows XP
      <ol>
      <li>A default Windows installation does not come with a free SSH
        client program - a free program that does SSH 
        can be found on Simon Tatham's
        <a href="http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/download.html"
        class="external">PuTTY page</a>. Download this to your Desktop
        and double click it to run.</li>

      <li><tt class="menu">Host Name (or IP address)</tt> is 
        <tt>grex.org</tt>. Click: <tt class="menu">Open</tt> to connect
        to Grex.</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
        
    <li>Unix, Linux, and Mac OS X
      <p>At a shell prompt, type:
      <samp>
        <tt>ssh newuser@grex.org</tt><br />
        <tt>ssh jbrown@grex.org</tt>
      </samp></p></li>

    <li>Sample SSH output
      <pre>
        localhost&gt; ssh newuser@grex.org
        The authenticity of host 'grex.org (216.86.77.194)' can't be established.
        RSA key fingerprint is 75:cc:a7:b5:b8:6a:6a:cc:a6:71:20:8d:ed:df:62:72.
        Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)?
      </pre></li>
    </ul>

    <p>What you are seeing is a <strong>sample</strong> of the Grex server's
    SSH key fingerprint. 
<!--You can view our <a href="/sysinfo.shtml">current server fingerprint here</a>. -->
    Make sure what you see within your SSH window matches our current 
    server-fingerprint.</p>
    
    <p>Type <tt>yes</tt> and press <tt>Enter</tt>, if it matches. You 
    will then be lead to SSH based, new user registration process.
    Follow the instructions to create your new account.</p>

   <h2 id="connect_telnet">Telnet Access</h2>
    <ul>
    <li>
    <b>Telnet usage has been removed from Grex as of October 10, 2011
    due to security issues.  We suggest you use SSH (see above). </b>
    </li>
    </ul>
  </div>

</div>

<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: connect.xhtml 1448 2014-03-23 20:15:37Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
