<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex Contact Information</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a><span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span> Contact Information</a></h1>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <p>Grex has numerous contact addresses. It is important to use
    the right one, because that way your question will be directed to
    the right group of people. This will save time for everyone
    concerned. Please take the time to determine the correct contact
    address.</p>

    <h2>Access Problems</h2>

    <p>If you are having access problems, such as an
    invalid or lost password, send email to staff, at
    <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>.</p>

    <h2>Reporting Abuse</h2>

    <p>If you received an abusive or other unwanted e-mail message
    or post from a Grex address, or if you wish to report any other
    kind of abusive behavior that involves Grex, please contact
    <a href="mailto:abuse@grex.org">abuse@grex.org</a>. Please note
    that if you are reporting abusive mail, you should forward the
    offending mail to this address and be sure to include full mail
    headers.  (In Pine, the "h" command shows you these headers.)</p>

    <h2>Reporting Spam</h2>

    <p>We cannot promise to eliminate all unsolicited commercial email
    (U.C.E.) messages from reaching your Grex mailbox. However, we are
    interested in doing the best that we can to reject such "spam"
    because we do not consider it to be an appropriate use of Grex's
    resources.  If you receive any such messages in your Grex mailbox,
    you may report these by sending a message to
    <a href="mailto:uce@grex.org">uce@grex.org</a>. Please attach a copy
    of the offending message, and include full mail headers. (In Alpine,
    the "h" command shows you these headers.)</p>

    <h2>Mail Administration</h2>

    <p>All questions or reports of problems relating to mail on Grex
    (except for reports of abusive or unwanted mail) should be sent
    to the Grex postmaster,
    <a href="mailto:postmaster@grex.org">postmaster@grex.org</a>.</p>

    <h2>Conference Administration</h2>

    <p>The conference administrators are responsible for maintaining
    the proper functioning of the Grex conferences, and for creating
    new conferences. Please use
    <a href="mailto:cfadm@grex.org">cfadm@grex.org</a> to communicate
    with the conference administrators.</p>

    <h2>Party Administration</h2>

    <p>The party program is Grex's real-time chat facility. there is a
    separate group of administrators for party. These people are responsible
    for maintaining channels and other party features.  Please contact
    <a href="mailto:partyadm@grex.org">partyadm@grex.org</a>.</p>

    <h2>Web Server Administration</h2>

    <p>Grex's web site is maintained by a separate group of staff members.
    If you have questions or suggestions about the web site, if you want to
    be listed in Grex's index of users' pages, or if you are having problems
    with the server, please contact the Grex Webmasters, at
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">webmaster@grex.org</a>.</p>

    <h2>The Grex Staff</h2>

    <p>Grex is maintained by an all-volunteer staff. If you have any
    general questions about Grex, about your account, or anything not
    explicitly listed above, send it to the Grex staff, at
    <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>.</p>

    <h2>Cyberspace Communications, Inc.</h2>

    <p>Grex is governed by Cyberspace Communications, Inc., a non-profit
    organization that was founded with the primary purpose of establishing
    and running Grex. The Cyberspace Communications board of directors is
    elected by the members of Grex. The board can be reached by email at
    <a href="mailto:board@grex.org">board@grex.org</a> or by mail at</p>

    <address class="vcard">
      <span class="fn org">Cyberspace Communications, Inc.</span><br />
      <span class="adr">
        <span class="post-office-box">P.O. Box 4432</span><br />
        <span class="locality">Ann Arbor</span>,
          <abbr class="region" title="Michigan">MI</abbr>
        <span class="postal-code">48106-4432</span><br />
        <span class="country-name">USA</span><br />
      </span><br />
    </address>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: contact.xhtml 1416 2014-03-23 00:40:30Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
