<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex FAQ</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Frequently Asked Questions About <span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">
    <ul>                                                                      
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>                  
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>               
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <div id="toc">
    <h2>Table of Contents</h2>

    <ul>
      <li>General

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#whatis">What is Grex?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#namegrex">What does the name "Grex" mean?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#whatdo">What can I do on this system?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#whatrun">What operating system are you running?</a></li>
        </ol>
      </li>

      <li>Conferencing

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#whatconf">What is "computer conferencing?"</a></li>

          <li><a href="#partconf">How can I participate in Grex's conferences?</a></li>
        </ol>
      </li>

      <li>Governance

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#grexgov">How is Grex governed?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#partgov">How can I participate in Grex governance?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#visa">Can I pay for membership by credit card?</a></li>
        </ol>
      </li>

      <li>How do I...?

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#change">... change my name, my shell, my mail
          forwarding or my password?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#chacct">... change my login ID?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#web">... set up a web page?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#irc">... run irc?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#chat">... chat with others?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#exitvi">... get out of vi?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#usenet">... access Usenet news?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#x">... run X-windows?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#restore">... restore a lost file from a
          backup tape?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#unixlist">... get a list of Unix
          commands?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#unix">... use Unix commands?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#webmail">... access Web-based mail
          providers?</a></li>
        </ol>
      </li>

      <li>Accounts and Passwords

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#lostpw">I can't remember my password. What do
          I do?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#reap">I have a Grex account. Why do I get "No
          such loginid?"</a></li>

          <li><a href="#userdel">I don't want to use my account
          anymore. How do I get it deleted?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#echo">When I enter my password, why don't I
          see anything?</a></li>
        </ol>
      </li>

      <li>E-Mail

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#forward">How do I get Grex to forward my mail
          to another site?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#fwdread">I set up .forward myself. Why
          doesn't it work?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#fwdhide">How can I hide my forwarding
          address?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#pop">How do I read mail with a browser or
          email client like Thunderbird or Outlook?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#spam">My mailbox is getting heavily spammed.
          What can I do?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#antispam">Why is mail that I send to Grex
          getting rejected?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#savedmail">Can I configure my mail program
          to save outgoing mail?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#attachments">Can I send attachments?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#dotdoc">How can I view an attachment file
          named myfile.doc?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#fromhdr">How can I set the "From" header in
          alpine for my outgoing mail?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#maillist">How do I set up a mailing list
          here?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#ftpmail">Is it OK to collect my mail by FTP?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#procmail">Why can't I get procmail to work?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#vacation">Can I set up an autoresponder to
          answer my mail while I am away for a while?</a></li>
        </ol>
      </li>

      <li>Privacy, Encryption, and Security

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#fingerme">My personal information should be
          private. Why is it shown?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#hidepeer">How can I keep private the place
          I'm logged on from?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#chatperms">I am receiving unwanted chat
          requests.  What can I do?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#dirperms">How can I view my friend's files?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#pgp">Can I run GPG or PGP on Grex to protect
          my email messages from being seen by others?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#ssh">Do you provide secure shell?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#sshproxy">Do you allow Grex to be used as a proxy for SSH?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#sshfinger">What is Grex's SSH fingerprint, so I can be
          sure I'm connecting to the real Grex? </a></li>
        </ol>
      </li>

      <li>Programming

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#compile">How do I compile a program?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#path">I compiled my program. Why won't the
          system run it?</a></li>

          <!-- <li><a href="#newuser">Can I have a copy of Grex's newuser
          program?</a></li> -->

          <li><a href="#write">Can I have a copy of Grex's
          write/chat/tel programs?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#party">Can I have a copy of Grex's party
          program?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#java">Please install Java?</a></li>
        </ol>
      </li>

      <li>Miscellaneous

        <ol>
          <li><a href="#ip">What is Grex's IP address?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#ipnumbers">Why does the "who" command show
          numeric IP addresses for some users?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#notelnet">Why does my browser say "Can't find
          application" when I click on the "SSH In" link?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#noconnect">When I try to SSH to Grex, it
          hangs. Why can't I connect?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#mindterm">I can't connect to the Mindterm
          terminal. What do I need to do?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#ping">Can I do a ping or traceroute from
          Grex?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#du">How much disk space can I use and how can
          I determine how much I am using?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#arrowsh">Why doesn't my arrow key work, so I
          can edit previous commands in sh?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#arrowtcsh">Why can't I edit previous commands
          in tcsh, ksh, or bash? They are supposed to support
          it.</a></li>

          <li><a href="#sttyrow">Why does the last line of each page
          of text disappear from the screen before I can read
          it?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#sttyrow2">Why do the bottom lines stay on the
          screen in the editor while the rest scroll
          normally?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#screen">Why doesn't "screen" work when I
          disconnect from Grex?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#core">I found a huge core file in my account.
          What should I do?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#homedir">How does the system decide where to
          put my home directory?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#party2">Where can I get a self-contained
          multi-user chat program for my linux box?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#colors">How can I get colors in the output
          from "ls"?</a></li>

          <li><a href="#volunteer">I know something about Unix. How
          can I help the Grex staff?</a></li>

        </ol>
      </li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <hr />

  <h2>General</h2>
  <ol>
    <li id="whatis">What is Grex?
    <p>Grex is a public-access Unix system providing free shell accounts
    and a computer conferencing community.  It is based out of the United
    States.  It is cooperatively owned and operated, and is supported
    entirely by user donations and volunteers.</p></li>

    <li id="namegrex">What does the name <q>Grex</q> mean?
    <p>Grex is not an acronym.  It is a Latin word meaning <q>flock</q>.
    It is the root of a number of familiar English words such as
    aggregate, congregate, and gregarious.</p></li>

    <li id="whatdo">What can I do on this system?
    <p>Grex provides all of the following services for free.</p>
    <ul>
      <li>Interactive Unix shell access, and access to the standard
          suite of Unix software including shells, tools and document
          preparation software.</li>

      <li>An interactive software development environment supporting
          many languages, compilers, editors, interpreters and tools.</li>

      <li>A number of software packages of mathematical, scientific,
          and statistical processing.</li>

      <li>Internet email using "mail", "mutt", "alpine" or "mh"</li>

      <li>Browse the web in text mode using "links", "w3m" or "lynx"</li>

      <li>Access to IRC</li>

      <li>Access to USENET</li>

      <li>Access to SSH, scp, sftp, and ftp to connect to
      other systems and services</li>

      <li>Free web site hosting</li>

      <li>On-line games, including "Nethack"</li>

      <li>Electronic conferencing using "Backtalk" or "Fronttalk"</li>

      <li>Multichannel real-time chat using "party"</li>
    </ul>

    <p>Please note that you must be a validated user to use software
    anything related to the network.</p>

    <p>And there are a few things you can only do if you are a member
    (who has made a donation and sent ID). These are</p>

    <ul>
      <li>Vote in Grex elections.</li>

      <li>Serve on the board of Cyberspace Communications.</li>
    </ul></li>

    <li id="whatrun">What operating system is Grex running?
    <p>Grex is currently running a nearly stock version of
    <a href="http://www.openbsd.org/">OpenBSD</a>.</p>

    <p>For the first 13 years of it's life, Grex ran on second-hand
    Sun computers, using Sun's proprietary version of Unix.  However,
    Grex now runs on standard server hardware based on the Intel 386
    instruction set.</p>

    <p>There are a lot of details about Grex's configuration available
    in the Grex staff notes on the web. Follow
    <a href="/staff/">this</a>
    link to more information about Grex's Hardware and software.</p></li>
  </ol>
  <hr />

  <h2>Conferencing</h2>
  <ol>
    <li id="whatconf">What is "computer conferencing?"
    <p>A computer conference is an area set aside for discussion on
    some general topic, such as computers, politics, or gardening. In
    such an area, people can read what other people have posted, and
    can introduce new subtopics or add responses to existing ones. On
    many systems, conferences are called "forums". Grex has many
    conferences. For a complete list, see
    <a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/pistachio/conflist">
    https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/pistachio/conflist</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="partconf">How can I participate in Grex's conferences?

    <p>Grex's conferences are accessible by a text-based terminal
    interface or by the World Wide Web. To access the text-based
    interface, SSH into Grex and run the "bbs" command. (This
    command is run automatically every time you log in if you
    choose the "bbs shell" after you validate your account.)
    World Wide Web access is provided by Grex's "Backtalk"
    conferencing software. Please see
    <a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk">
    https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk</a> for details on using
    Backtalk.</p></li>
  </ol>
  <hr />

  <h2>Governance</h2>
  <ol>
    <li id="grexgov">How is Grex governed?

    <p>Cyberspace Communications functions as an online democracy,
    with policies set by its users. The
    <a href="/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Acoop">Co-op Conference</a>
    is open to all users and provides a forum for
    discussing policy issues. The Board of Directors, elected by the
    members, is the formal governing body and uses consensus in the
    Co-op Conference as its primary guide for making decisions. Any
    member of Grex who can attend the monthly meetings, held in Ann
    Arbor, Michigan, is eligible to run for the Board of Directors.
    In addition, any member can call a binding vote by the membership
    on any policy issue. The
    <a href="/cgi-bin/backtalk/pistachio/read?conf=coop&amp;csel=&amp;item=1&amp;rsel=all&amp;noskip=1&amp;showforgotten=2">Articles of Incorporation</a>
    and
    <a href="/cgi-bin/backtalk/pistachio/read?conf=coop&amp;csel=&amp;item=341&amp;rsel=all&amp;noskip=1&amp;showforgotten=2">Bylaws</a>
    can be viewed online.</p></li>

    <li id="partgov">How can I participate in Grex
    governance?

    <p>Any user can have a voice in Grex governance by joining the
    Co-op conference and participating in the discussions there. If
    you wish to be eligible to vote in Grex elections and to run for
    the Board of Directors, you can become a Grex <em>member</em>.
    Membership dues are US$2/month or US$18/year. To find out how to
    make membership payments, please see
    <a href="/member.xhtml">http://grex.org/member.xhtml</a>.
    Membership donations are Grex's primary source of financing.</p></li>

    <li id="visa">Can I pay for membership by credit card?

    <p><a href="/member.xhtml">Yes</a>!</p></li>
  </ol>
  <hr />

  <h2>How do I ... ?</h2>

  <ol>
    <li id="change">How do I change my name, my shell, my mail
      forwarding or my password?

    <p>You can change any of these properties of your account with
    the "change" command. If you are using a menu or if you are at a
    bbs (Ok) prompt, type "!change" If you are in lynx, type "!" (an
    exclamation point) to get to a shell prompt first. At a shell
    prompt, type "change" and follow the menu-based instructions.</p>
    
    <p>Note: For changing your shell, you will be put in the unix chsh
    command.  The acceptable shells for this command are:</p>

           <br />/bin/sh
           <br />/bin/csh
           <br />/bin/ksh
           <br />/usr/local/bin/bash
           <br />/usr/local/bin/es
           <br />/usr/local/bin/psh
           <br />/usr/local/bin/rc
           <br />/usr/local/bin/sash
           <br />/usr/local/bin/scsh
           <br />/usr/local/bin/tcsh
           <br />/usr/local/bin/zsh
           <br />/cyberspace/bin/bbsh
           <br />/cyberspace/bin/menu<br/> 
    </li>

    <li id="chacct">How do I change my login ID?

    <p>You can't change it. Instead, you have to create a new account
    with the login ID that you wish.  Once you have done that, you can
    copy the files that you need from your old account to your new
    one. When you no longer need your old account, you can ask to
    have it deleted by sending a request from your old account to
    <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="web">How do I set up a web page?

    <p>There is a completely separate FAQ for all questions related
    to the Grex web server. Please see
    <a href="/wwwfaq.xhtml">http://grex.org/wwwfaq.xhtml</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="irc">How do I access IRC?

    <p>If you are an unvalidated user, you cannot access IRC.  We
    strongly urge you to get validated!  Send email to
    <a href="mailto:porters@grex.org">porters@grex.org</a>
    to get started!  You must have a Grex user name in order to be
    validated.  Please see <a href="newuser/index.xhtml">
    http://grex.org/newuser/index.xhtml</a> for instructions.</p>

    <p>If you are a validated user, you can access IRC through a
    number of clients we have installed including the venerable
    ircII, the well-known irssi, sirc and several others.</p></li>

    <p><b><font color="#ff0000">Grex does not allow the running of bots or bouncers such as
    psybnc or eggdrop.  They will be killed if found running.  Persistent running of
    bots or bouncers may result in your account being locked.</font></b></p>

    <li id="chat">How do I chat with others?

    <p>Grex has six ways of chatting:</p>

    <ul>
      <li>'party' is a chat program that many people can run at
      once.</li>

      <li>'write' sends text to the other person's screen one line at
      a time.</li>

      <li>'chat' is like 'write' but it sends one character at a
      time.</li>

      <li>'tel' is like 'write' but it sends only one line and then
      stops.</li>

      <li>'talk' splits the screen in half, so both people can type
      at once.</li>

      <li>'ytalk' is like talk but can accommodate more than two
      people.</li>
    </ul></li>

    <li id="exitvi">How do I get out of vi?

    <p>vi (pronounced vee-eye) is a powerful text editor, but it has
    a steep learning curve at first. You can usually tell that you
    are in vi when you have a vertical line of squiggles (tildes) on
    the left of your screen. If you are trapped in vi, remember to
    type the escape key and then :q! (colon-q-exclamation point)
    followed by a return. The "ee" and "pico" editors are much friendlier
    for less experienced users.</p></li>

    <li id="usenet">How do I access Usenet news?
    <p>There are a number of Usenet reader programs on Grex, including
    slrn, tin, trn and nn.  You can also access Usenet via one of the
    text web browsers installed on Grex, such as w3m, links or lynx.
    Just connect to
    <a href="http://groups.google.com/">http://groups.google.com/</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="x">How do I run X11 programs?
    <p>The easiest way is to login to Grex using SSH, which will
    likely set your DISPLAY environment variable and X authority
    files automatically.  Then, just run the graphical program in
    question.  Alternately, you may have to specify these settings
    by hand; check the X11 documentation for more details.</p>

    <p>Note, however, that using X from Grex is likely to be painfully
    slow, and also uses a lot of resources on Grex itself.  We ask that,
    in general, you refrain from using X programs.</p></li>

    <li id="restore">How do I restore a lost file from a backup
    <p>We can't do that. We just don't have time. Grex makes nightly
    backups, but the purpose of these backups is to protect the
    system from disaster.  Unfortunately, there is not enough time to
    honor requests from individual users to restore files.  Grex is
    not a good place to keep any file that you cannot afford to lose.
    If you have an important file on Grex, it is your responsibility
    to keep a backup of it on your own computer.</p></li>

    <li id="unixlist">How do I get a list of Unix commands?
    <p>There are so many Unix commands that we recommend that users
    who are not familiar with Unix use the "menu" command to explore
    Grex.  The most common commands are available there.  If you really
    want a list, then run the Grex command "listcommands" to print a
    list of most Unix commands on Grex. (Built-in shell commands are
    not included).  This will take a long time to run.</p></li>

    <li id="unix">How do I use Unix commands?
    <p>The Unix operating system is amazingly powerful and flexible,
    with thousands of commands.  Unix can be a challenge to get started
    with, but if you are interested in learning Unix, Grex is a good
    place to start, since we do give you access to almost all commands.</p>

    <p>For online introductions to basic Unix commands and editors such
    as <em>emacs</em> and <em>vi</em> usage, consult
    <a href="http://google.com/">Google</a>
    and do searches for things like, <q>Unix tutorial</q> or
    <q>vi tutor</q>.</p>

    <p>Online reference information about most commands can be called
    up via the "man" command. For example, for information about the
    date command, type:</p>
    <samp>
        <tt>man date</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>The book <q>Unix for the Impatient</q> is excellent, though
    slightly dated.</p></li>

    <li id="webmail">How do I access Web mail?

    <p>You can try with one of the textual browsers installed on Grex,
    but most web-based mail services expect graphical browsers with
    more functionality. However, you can use some webmail servers (for
    instance, GMail) by configuring one of the mail programs already
    installed on Grex (for instance, mutt or alpine) to pull mail via
    POP3 or IMAP from a remote server and to send outgoing mail through
    a remote server.</p></li>
  </ol>

  <hr />

  <h2>Accounts and Passwords</h2>
  <ol>
    <li id="lostpw">I can't remember my password. What do I
    do?

    <p>Contact the Grex staff. Send mail from another site if you
    have access to email at another site. Send messages about access
    problems to <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>.
    Remember to specify which account is the one you lost the
    password for.</p>

    <p>You can also log in to Grex as "trouble" without a password,
    which will send a message to the staff. Be sure to provide a
    postal address, an email address, or a local telephone number,
    so that the staff can contact you in return.</p></li>

    <li id="readp">I have a Grex account. Why do I get "No such
    loginid?"

    <p>This means that your account has been deleted. Accounts on
    Grex are deleted if no one logs in for more than 3 months. There
    is not enough room on Grex to keep old unused accounts. To avoid
    losing your account, you should log in every month or two.
    Accessing your web page, or having your mail get forwarded does
    not count, but conferencing over the web using your account and
    password in Backtalk does count as logging in for this
    purpose.</p>

    <p>If your account has been deleted, it usually cannot be
    recovered or restored. Please feel free to recreate the
    account.</p></li>

    <li id="userdel">I don't want to use my account anymore. How do
      I get it deleted?

    <p>If you don't want to wait until your account expires, you have
    to log in one last time and send a message to <a href=
    "mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a> from the account that
    you want deleted. In your message, ask for it to be deleted.</p></li>

    <li id="echo">When I enter my password, why don't I see
    anything?

    <p>Grex does not display your password as you type it. This is to
    keep it secret from anybody who might be looking over your
    shoulder. Type your password anyway. Even though you don't see
    it, Grex will register it and, if you typed it correctly, you
    will be logged in.</p></li>
  </ol>
  <hr />

  <h2>Email</h2>
  <ol>
    <li id="forward">How do I get Grex to forward my mail to another site?

    <p>Put the address to which you would like your Grex email forwarded
    to in a file called ".forward" in your home directory.</p>

    <p>If you don't know how to do that, you can use the "change" command.
    Just type "change" at a shell prompt or "!change" at any other prompt.
    This will invoke a menu that allows you to change common setting for
    your account, including the mail forwarding option.</p></li>

    <li id="fwdread">I set up .forward myself.  Why doesn't it work?

    <p>Probably because it is not world readable.  .forward files must
    be world readable in order to be valid on Grex.  If you are
    looking for a way to forward your mail to an anonymous place, you
    need to find an anonymous remailer system. Grex doesn't do this.
    To make your .forward file world readable, change to your home
    directory (type: <tt>cd</tt>) and then issue this command:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>chmod 644 .forward</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>Your home directory must also be world accessible; type:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>chmod 755 .</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>or use <strong>711</strong> instead of <strong>755</strong> if
    you don't want other people to be able to scan your directory.</p></li>

    <li id="fwdhide">How can I hide my forwarding address?
    <p>You can't.  Grex does not wish to provide anonymous remailing
    services. You may wish to make use of one of the various anonymous
    remailers available on the Internet; use your favorite web search
    engine to find one.</p></li>

    <li id="pop">How do I read mail with Thunderbird or Outlook?
    <p>Configure your local client to connect to Grex via SSL
    encrypted IMAP and SMTP; enter your grex login name and password
    where prompted.</p>

    <p>Please note, we support the IMAP protocol, but not POP3.</p></li>

    <li id="spam">My mailbox is getting heavily spammed. What can I do?
    <p>Spam (unwanted mail) is unfortunately very common on the
    internet, and there's little anyone can do about it.</p>

    <p>Grex has installed SpamAssassin to help you cut down on the
    noise.  This reduces but does not eliminate spam.</p></li>

    <li id="antispam">Why is mail that I send to Grex getting rejected?

    <p>This usually happens when the sending site is not configured
    properly.  Problems in mail configuration can often lead to mail
    that has an invalid return address.  Grex's mail system tries very
    hard to detect and reject invalid sending addresses, in order to
    reduce the amount of spam on Grex. If your mail looks like spam,
    then Grex will reject it.  If you think this is
    happening to your legitimate mail, send a rejected copy of it to
    <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>, and be sure to
    include all of the mail headers.  Ordinarily, the additional
    surrounding text and context of the forwarded email should be
    enough to convince the mailer that the email is legitimate.</p>

    <p>Other common reasons for mail to Grex to be rejected are that
    it may be too large or your mailbox may have grown too large.</p></li>

    <li id="savedmail">Can I configure my mail program to save outgoing mail?

    <p>This feature is turned off on Grex by default, because lots of
    new users were accumulating vast files of old mail without ever
    knowing that they were doing it.  You're quite welcome to configure
    this feature, as long as you keep an eye on your disk usage so that
    you don't exceed Grex's <strong>100 megabyte limit</strong> for
    your account.</p>

    <p>To configure your mail client, consult its documentation.
    For alpine, go into the configuration screen and look for the setting
    for "default-fcc".  Set it to "saved-mail" or whatever name you would
    like to use.  You need to use quotation marks around the file name.</p></li>

    <li id="attachments">Can I send attachments?
    <p>Yes.  You must first transfer the file you wish to attach to Grex,
    and then attach it when composing your email message.  If you don't
    need the file on Grex after you've sent it, please remember to delete
    the file after you are done.  Also, please keep attachments to a
    reasonable size so as not to overwhelm our service.</p></li>

    <li id="dotdoc">How can I view an attachment file named myfile.doc?
    <p>Any file that ends with ".doc" is probably a Microsoft Word
    file.  There is no way to view such a file on Grex.  You will have
    to download that file to a computer that has Microsoft Word or
    some other word processor that can import such files.</p></li>

    <li id="fromhdr">How can I set the "From" header in pine for my
      outgoing mail?
    <p>In Pine on Grex, you can't set the "From:" field. This is
    disabled because there were too many problems with people setting
    invalid addresses, which caused their outgoing mail to bounce to
    the postmaster whenever it was undeliverable.</p></li>

    <li id="maillist">How do I set up a mailing list here?

    <p>You can't. We're sorry, but this is not permitted. You can
    only forward mail to a single site elsewhere on the internet.
    Mailing lists are too resource intensive for Grex to support. You
    may wish to try using an advertising-based free mailing list
    service. Both <a href="http://groups.google.com">Google Groups</a>
    and <a href="http://groups.yahoo.com/">Yahoo Groups</a>
    offer free mailing lists with lots of features.</p></li>

    <li id="ftpmail">Is it OK to collect my mail by SCP, SFTP or FTP?

    <p>Yes, but you must do it correctly.</p>

    <p>It is risky to attempt to transfer your mail spool file off of
    Grex.  You risk losing some or all of your collected mail, because
    the sftp, scp and FTP daemons does not participate in the locking
    scheme used by the mail delivery programs.  In addition, your account
    may appear to be abandoned because file transfers do not update the
    date of last login. This could result in loss of your account if it
    is the only way you use Grex.</p>

    <p>Instead, we recommend connecting to Grex and running a mail
    client program.  These all do participate in the locking mechanism
    for the mail spool.  Collect all of your mail into a file in your
    home directory, and then log out. You may now safely fetch that
    file, but please remember to delete it once it has been safely
    transferred.</p></li>

    <li id="procmail">Why can't I get procmail to work?
    <p>The most likely reason is that you have not told procmail how
    to find your mail spool file. To find your spool file, type</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>echo $MAIL</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>Procmail will work if you make this one of the first lines
    of the .procmailrc file:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>MAIL=PATH-TO-YOUR-INBOX</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>For example, the first line of a .procmailrc file
    used by member John Remmers (remmers) would be:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>MAIL=/var/mail/remmers</tt>
    </samp></li>

    <li id="vacation">Can I set up an autoresponder to answer my
      mail while I am away for a while?

    <p>Yes. Try the vacation program. Type <tt>vacation</tt> to run it.</p></li>
  </ol>

  <hr />

  <h2>Privacy, Encryption, and Security</h2>
  <ol>
    <li id="fingerme">My personal information should be private. Why
    is it shown?

    <p>When you look up your own user information, you can always see
    it, even if it is set up so that nobody else on the system can
    see it. To see what other people see, ask for the info about
    "youraccount@grex.org" instead of just "youraccount".</p></li>

    <li id="hidepeer">How can I keep private the place I'm logged on
      from?

    <p>This is considered public information on Grex. The only way to
    hide it is not to log on.</p></li>

    <li id="chatperms">I am receiving unwanted chat requests. What
    can I do?

    <p>You can adjust the chat settings for your account with the
    "change" command. To run it, type "change" at a shell prompt, or
    "!change" from a menu or from bbs. Then choose "W) Write
    settings" and follow the menus from there. You can: turn off all
    chat requests, accept all chat requests, or select which users
    can and cannot chat with you.</p></li>

    <li id="dirperms">How can I view my friend's files?

    <p>Grex is a very open system, so directories are open to the
    public unless the owner decides to make them private. Email,
    however, is automatically saved in private files that the world
    cannot see.</p>

    <p>To permit a file so that it can be seen by others, type</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>chmod a+r file-name</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>To permit a directory, type</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>chmod a+rx dir-name</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>To hide a file or directory, type</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>chmod ou-rx file-or-dir-name</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>If you hide your home directory completely, neither
    mail forwarding nor web hosting will be available to you. You may
    make your directory accessible without allowing it to be scanned.
    This is how:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>chmod 711 dir-name</tt>
    </samp></li>

    <li id="pgp"><p>Can I run PGP on Grex to protect my email messages
      from being seen by others?</p>

    <p>Yes. PGP is available on Grex, but be aware that will probably
    not offer you the protection you seek on our service. In order to be
    effective, PGP must be installed on your own computer, not on Grex,
    which you should not consider secure. Encrypting or decrypting a
    message on Grex would mean that the message would have to travel
    over an insecure network before encryption or after decryption,
    and this is not the way to protect your message. Even if you
    connect to Grex using SSH, there is still a huge risk that Grex
    itself will be compromised.</p>

    <p>In order to install PGP on your home computer, North American
    users should go to the MIT PGP Distribution Site at <a href=
  "http://web.mit.edu/network/pgp.html">http://web.mit.edu/network/pgp.html</a>,
    and all other users should use the international PGP home page at
    <a href="http://www.pgpi.org/">http://www.pgpi.org/</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="ssh">Do you provide secure shell?
    <p>Yes, we do. Secure shell (ssh) is a good way to connect
    because your session is encrypted, so that passwords cannot be
    intercepted by sniffers.  In fact, we have removed telnet
    access in favor of SSH in October 2011 due to these security 
    concerns.
    </p></li>

    <li id="sshproxy">Do you allow Grex to be used as a proxy using SSH?
    <p>Sorry, no.  This type of connection is disallowed by our firewall
    settings, so it won't work.
    </p></li>

    <li id="sshfinger">What is Grex's SSH fingerprint so I can be
    sure I'm connecting to the real Grex?
       <p>Currently Grex's SSH fingerprint is (depending on how SSH is connecting):</p>
       <ul>
          <li>256 30:82:50:ba:6c:26:68:01:52:64:dc:54:83:8e:95:7e  root@grex.cyberspace.org (ECDSA)</li>
          <li>2048 2f:26:4a:b5:f3:df:85:e0:30:d1:94:3d:06:8e:be:66  root@grex.cyberspace.org (DSA)</li>
          <li>2048 75:cc:a7:b5:b8:6a:6a:cc:a6:71:20:8d:ed:df:62:72  root@grex.cyberspace.org (RSA)</li>
          <li>2048 79:b0:32:79:b5:a7:e2:67:d5:78:4e:27:d5:f3:62:c7  root@grex.cyberspace.org (RSA1)</li>
       </ul>
    </li>

  </ol>

  <hr />

  <h2>Programming</h2>
  <ol>
    <li id="compile">How do I compile a program?

    <p>To compile a C program named <tt>foo.c</tt>, type
    <tt>gcc&nbsp;foo.c&nbsp;-o&nbsp;foo</tt> This compiles foo.c and
    creates an executable program named <tt>foo</tt>. To run it, type
    <tt>./foo</tt> Likewise, to compile a C++ program named
    <tt>foo.cpp</tt>, type <tt>g++&nbsp;foo.cpp&nbsp;-o&nbsp;foo</tt>
    Please <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">check with the Grex
    staff</a> before compiling programs you bring in from the net.
    Most of the useful programs are already installed here, and many
    others will not run on Grex, but compiling them on Grex wastes a
    lot of bandwidth and cpu time &#8212; resources that Grex is
    short on.</p></li>

    <li id="path">I compiled my program. Why won't the system run
      it?

    <p>Usually this is because the program is not on your path.
    Unlike a DOS or Windows system, on Unix the current directory is
    not automatically placed on your path. So if you compile a
    program named foo, you cannot run it by just typing "foo". You
    need either to place the executable somewhere on your path, or to
    precede its name with ./ (dot-slash) so you would type
    "./foo".</p></li>

    <!-- <li id="newuser">Can I have a copy of Grex's newuser
      program?

    <p>Yes, you can find out more about newuser, including
    availability, on this web page: <a href=
    "~mdw/newuser.html">http://grex.org/~mdw/newuser.html</a>.</p></li> -->

    <li id="write">Can I have a copy of Grex's write/chat/tel programs?
    <p>Yes, you can find out more about write/chat/tel, including
    availability, on this web page: <a href=
    "http://unixpapa.com/write.html">http://unixpapa.com/write.html</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="party">Can I have a copy of Grex's party
      program?
    <p>Yes, you can find out more about party, including
    availability, on this web page: <a href=
    "http://unixpapa.com/party.html">http://unixpapa.com/party.html</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="java">Please install Java?
    <p>Java is installed on Grex.  See: /usr/local/jdk-1.7.0/ </p></li>
  </ol>

  <hr />

  <h2>Miscellaneous</h2>
  <ol>
    <li id="notelnet">Why does my browser say "Can't find
    application" when I click on the "SSH In" link?

    <p>You need to configure your browser to find your SSH
    application program. The exact instructions for doing this vary
    widely depending upon both your operating system and your
    browser. Select the SSH application that came with your
    system, or one you downloaded from the internet. For more
    details about SSH applications, see the Grex SSH Information
    page at <a href="ssh.xhtml">http://grex.org/ssh.xhtml</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="noconnect">When I try to SSH to Grex, it hangs. Why
      can't I connect?

    <p>There are several things that can go wrong.</p>

    <ul>
      <li>You don't have DNS working properly. In this case you can
      connect to Grex by using its IP address. See <a href=
      "#ip">below</a>.</li>

      <li>You are accessing the net via a firewall which blocks
      SSH. In this case you need to contact your security
      administrator for the LAN which you are accessing the net from,
      and ask if there is a way to SSH through the firewall.</li>

      <li>Your SSH client is not working properly. You would not
      be able to SSH to any other site, either. Have you tried
      any? Try connecting with SSH to arbornet.org and see if you 
      get a login prompt.</li>

      <li>Grex is down. This happens occasionally. You can usually
      tell if Grex is down by trying to access the web site. Try
      reloading to eliminate the possibility of a cached page. This
      won't be a good test if your connection uses a caching proxy
      server.</li>

      <li>If it is none of the above, send mail to <a href=
      "mailto:help@grex.org">The Grex Staff</a> and explain
      everything you tried, and also please specify the IP address
      and the GMT time that your attempt failed. If you can provide
      the results of a ping or traceroute from your end, that may
      prove to be helpful, too.</li>
    </ul></li>

    <li id="ping">Can I do a ping or traceroute from
      Grex?

    <p>These tools are not available on Grex. Vandals were using them
    to attack other sites. This is a ludicrous thing to do from Grex,
    because Grex is so tiny that its CPU and net connection become
    overloaded long before any other system would even begin to
    notice that it was being attacked. But people were doing it
    anyway, and hurting Grex. Regrettably, the actions of a few
    thoughtless people has forced Grex to disable these potentially
    valuable network analysis tools.</p>

    <p>You may be able to use a remote traceroute server on the web.
    See <a href=
    "http://www.traceroute.org/">http://www.traceroute.org/</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="ip">What is Grex's IP address?

    <p>At the time this answer was last updated, the IP address of
    Grex was 162.202.67.158, but IP addresses may change at any time.
    In general, we have little control over changes to our IP address.
    You should always use the hostname, because if the IP address
    does change, the DNS (Domain/Name Service) lookup of the hostname
    should produce the new IP address. If you are unsure if a problem is
    due to DNS, you can test to see if you can connect using our IP
    address. However, if you can, it is strongly recommended that you
    resolve the problem you are having with DNS, so that you do not
    have to rely on inherently unreliable IP addresses.</p></li>

    <li id="ipnumbers">Why does the "who" command show numeric IP
      addresses for some users?

    <p>That is because this information is stored in a file (utmp)
    which only permits 16 characters of storage for this information.
    If the IP address exceeds 16 characters when converted to text
    form, then it is stored (and reported) only in its numeric form.
    This affects other commands besides the "who" command, such as
    the "finger" and "last" commands.</p></li>

    <li id="du">How much disk space can I use and how can I
      determine how much I am using?

    <p>The disk quota on grex is <strong>100 megabytes</strong>, enforced
    by the 'quota' system. You can find out how much disk space you are
    using (in kilobytes) by running the following command in your home
    directory:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>du -sk</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>The number that comes back is the number of kilobytes of disk
    you are using. If you are using more than 100000, please remove
    files.</p>

    <p>The command</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>quota</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>will show your quota and usage on the current file
    system. The command</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>quota -v</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>will show your quota and usage on all the file
    systems you have "write" access.</p>

    <p>If you are thinking of putting something big in your account,
    please talk to the Grex staff
    (<a href= "mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>) first. There
    aren't many good reasons to put big things in your Grex account:
    Grex doesn't allow multimedia files on its web pages (not even
    image files), and most of the useful programs that will actually
    run on Grex are already installed on Grex. So please talk to the
    staff first.</p>

    <p>If you exceed the <strong>100 megabyte</strong> disk quota or have
    multimedia files, big downloaded program packages, or vandal tools,
    in your account, a member of the Grex staff will delete the files
    and quite likely lock your account. The Grex staff spent way too
    much time policing this and was usually quite crabby about the whole
    topic. So the current Grex computer has automated disk quotas,
    which will notify you when you go over quota and prevent your
    creating new files if you stay over quota.</p></li>

    <li id="arrowsh">Why doesn't my arrow key work, so I can edit
      previous commands in sh?

    <p>This is because Grex is running a real sh, and that is a
    feature not supported by sh. What some Unix systems call <strong>sh</strong>
    is actually <em>bash</em>, an enhanced version of the sh shell which
    does this. If you would like to use bash instead, you should change
    your shell on Grex to bash. You can do that by running the change
    command.</p></li>

    <li id="arrowtcsh">Why can't I edit previous commands in tcsh,
      ksh, or bash? They are supposed to support it.

    <p>Bash, ksh and tcsh do support previous line editing. It may
    not be working the way you expect because a different default
    editing mode is in use. To change the default editing mode to the
    style of emacs or vi, the command you must use depends upon your
    shell. For ksh and bash, use one of the following commands:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>set -o emacs</tt><br />
      <tt>set -o vi</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>The equivalents in tcsh are:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>bindkey -e</tt><br />
      <tt>bindkey -v</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>After that, you should be able to edit your command
    line in a way that is familiar to you. If you prefer to preserve
    this setting so you don't have to execute it every time you log
    in, then place it in <tt>.profile</tt> (ksh and bash) or
    <tt>.login</tt> (tcsh).</p></li>

    <li id="sttyrow">Why does the last line of each page of text
      disappear from the screen before I can read it?

    <p>This happens when Grex doesn't know how many rows of text are
    on your screen. The easiest way to set this correctly is to run
    the "resize" program on Grex. It will set things up for you.</p></li>

    <li id="sttyrow2">Why do the bottom lines stay on the screen in
      the editor while the rest scroll normally?

    <p>Same problem. Wrong number of lines in the setting. See
    solution above.</p></li>

    <li id="screen">Why doesn't "screen" work when I disconnect from
      Grex?

    <p>Grex runs a special daemon that kills all user processes when
    a user logs out. This prevents users from running servers or
    robots of any kind. It also prevents them from using the
    reconnect feature of screen (although the other features work
    fine). The reason for this policy is to prevent users from
    consuming our limited resources while not logged in.</p>

    <p>Note: This was the case several years ago, but no longer is.
    screen should stay connected now.</p></li>

    <li id="core">I found a huge core file in my account. What
    should I do?

    <p>Nothing really. This is a file that gets created if a program
    fails (crashes). It is intended to help the programmer find
    whatever bug caused the failure. If not renamed, these files will
    be deleted automatically in a day or two. You can delete it if
    you wish. By the way, a core file usually doesn't take up as much
    space on the disk as it appears to, because it is "sparse" (full
    of empty space).</p></li>

    <li id="homedir">How does the system decide where to put my home
      directory?

    <p>Grex uses a hierarchical arrangement of home directories to
    keep the directory sizes from growing too large and thus becoming
    inefficient. So, on Grex, home directories are always located by
    a path of this form:</p>

    <samp>
      <tt>/x/y/z/username</tt>
    </samp>

    <p>The <strong>x</strong> is the disk letter, the <strong>y</strong> is the first letter
    of the username, and the <strong>z</strong> is the second letter of the
    username. Currently we have two disks that user accounts occupy,
    <strong>/a</strong> and <strong>/c</strong> (<em>/b was not available</em>). The choice of
    disk is determined when your account is created. This choice is
    switched  back and forth manually by the staff to keep the available
    disk space  balanced.</p>

    <p>The environment variable <strong>$HOME</strong> should always be
    set to the full path of your home directory. The ~ symbol may also be
    used as a shorthand for your home directory, as long as your shell
    supports it. (The Bourne Shell does not.)</p></li>

    <li id="party2">Where can I get a self-contained multi-user chat
      program for my linux box?

    <p>You might want to try out Grex's party program. See the
    <a href="#party">Party Question</a> in this FAQ.</p></li>

    <li id="colors">How can I get colors in the output from
      "ls"?

    <p>Color listings are available with many terminal types, but
    whether or not they show up depends on which terminal emulator
    you're using. See
    <a href="/ssh.xhtml">http://grex.org/ssh.xhtml</a>
    for more information on SSH programs. You also need to turn on
    color listing. This involves two steps. You will need to run
    <tt>gdircolors</tt> for you shell. If your shell is a sh-like
    shell (sh, bash, ksh), you will run the following command:
    <tt>eval&nbsp;`gdircolors&nbsp;-b`</tt> otherwise, if your shell
    is a csh like shell (csh, tcsh) you will run the following
    command: <tt>eval&nbsp;`gdircolors&nbsp;-c`</tt> Then, if you use
    ls with the <tt>--color=auto</tt> option, it will use colors. You
    can add the following alias to your .profile file of startup
    commands (for bash-type shells, or your .login file for csh-type
    shells):
    <tt>alias&nbsp;ls='/usr/local/bin/gls&nbsp;--color=auto'</tt> to
    always get color listings when your terminal emulator can support
    it.</p></li>

    <li id="volunteer">I know something about Unix. How can I help
      the Grex staff?

    <p>We are always delighted to have new volunteers One of the
    things that Grex needs most urgently is more people to answer
    "help" requests. It is recommended that you check out the
    helpers conference.</p>

    <p>Also you should read the <a href="/staff/">Grex Staff
    Notes</a>.</p></li>

    <li id="mindterm">I can't connect to the Mindterm terminal. What
    do I need to do?

    <p>Mindterm is a java-based SSH terminal you can use from the Grex
    web site, so you need to have the Java Runtime Environment installed
    to use it.  Make sure this is the case.</p>

    <p>See <a href="trouble/installjre.xhtml">Installing JRE</a></p>.

    <p>You will also need to add grex.org and cyberspace.org (and their
    related URLs with http:// and https://) to your Java Exception
    Site List.  You do this from the Security tab in the Java Control
    Panel.</p>

    <p>As Java and web browers get more and more particular about the
    sites they'll connect to, you may, from time to time, need to
    re-acknowledge and accept that you want to connect to grex.org.</p>
    </li>

  </ol>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: faq.xhtml 1536 2015-12-29 17:05:52Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
