<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>
  <title>What is Grex?</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>What is <span id="grex"><em>Grex?</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <p>Grex is a public access Unix and computer conferencing system,
    featuring ongoing bulletin board discussion areas (called conferences),
    multi-user chat channels, Internet email, and more. Grex is supported
    by our users, and is run entirely by volunteers. Access is free, but
    donations are always welcome.</p>

    <p>We're located in Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, and have been
    running since 1991. Grex is owned by a non-profit corporation
    called Cyberspace Communications, Inc. But don't let the fancy
    name fool you - CCI has no employees or offices, and Grex is its
    main asset, aside from volunteers and users. If you <a href=
    "member.xhtml">become a member</a>, you can vote in Grex
    elections, including the annual election for CCI's board of
    directors.</p>

    <h2>More about Grex:</h2>

    <ul>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml">Grex FAQ</a>
        - Frequently Asked Questions about Grex.</li>

      <li><a href="cyberspace/handbook.xhtml">User Guide</a>
        - our online user's manual (a bit dated, but still useful.)</li>

      <li><a href="staff/">Staff Notes</a>
        - Detailed descriptions of various adminstrative and technical
          matters from Grex's staff.</li>

      <li><a href="cyberspace/">Cyberspace Communications</a>
        - Our bylaws, monthly board meeting minutes, and more.</li>

      <li><a href="history.xhtml">History of Grex</a> - Background on
      our origins, excerpted from a conference discussion.</li>

      <li><a href="cyberspace/principles.xhtml">Declaration of Principles</a>
        - A bit dry, but a good brief synposis of what Grex is about.</li>

      <li><a href="http://www.hvcn.org/info/grexwalk/grexwalk.html">GrexWalk</a>
        - Join Grexers for our weekly walk in Ann Arbor.</li>

      <li><a href="whatsnew.xhtml">What's new on Grex?</a>
        - A short list of recent changes to Grex.</li>
  </ul>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: grex.xhtml 1415 2014-03-23 00:37:47Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
