<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Party on Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Party on <span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p>Party (<tt>party</tt>) is a multi-user chat program. Everything you
  type is shown on the screen of others who are running party.
  Everything they type is shown on your screen.</p>

  <p>In order to use party, you must be logged in to <q>Grex</q>. There
  is no web-based chat service on Grex. If you are connecting over the
  internet, <a href="ssh://grex.org">ssh to Grex</a>. Note:
  this link will only work if your browser has been configured to
  start an SSH client (for example, there is an add-in for Firefox
  to allow this: <a href="https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/firessh/">FireSSH</a>). 
  If it doesn't work, you may need to change your browser's preferences, 
  or in some cases, <a href="ssh.xhtml">download an SSH client application</a> 
  program.</p>

  <p>Once you are logged in, there are several commands related to
  party which you can use:</p>
  <ul>
    <li>There is a FAQ which can be read by typing
    <tt>party-faq</tt> on the Unix command-line. You can
    also read the Unix documentation for party by typing
    <tt>man party</tt></li>

    <li>You can see who is in party at the moment by typing the
    <tt>pwho</tt> command.</li>

    <li>Use the <tt>party</tt> command to start party. Type a
    <strong>?</strong> to see what you can type, or just watch the conversation
    until you feel like joining in.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>Party supports multiple channels, and has a "noise" feature
  which allows you to send canned responses with subtitutable
  strings.</p>

  <p>If you have questions about party or wish to request some
  feature, please send e-mail to Grex's party admininstrators at
  <a href="mailto:partyadm@grex.org">partyadm@grex.org</a>.
  </p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: party.xhtml 1421 2014-03-23 00:54:40Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>

