<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>SSH Information</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>SSH Information</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <h2> What is SSH?</h2>

    <p><tt>ssh</tt> (<strong>SSH</strong> client) is a program for logging
    into a remote machine and for executing commands on a remote machine.
    It is intended to replace <tt>telnet</tt>, <tt>rlogin</tt> and <tt>rsh</tt>,
    and provide secure encrypted communications between two untrusted hosts
    over an insecure network.  Since your personal computer is not directly
    connected to our <q>Grex</q> server, the data you send us has to pass
    through unknown computers handling Internet data traffic. These machines
    have access and can read some of your transimitted data, if they choose.
    Your passwords and login info, among other things, could be stolen and,
    perhaps, used on other sites. SSH prevents all this by encrypting your
    transmitted data making it nearly impossible to understand.</p>

    <h2> How do I use SSH?</h2>

    <p>You need to download a program that supports the SSH protocol.</p>

    <p>Most computers running Unix or its variants (including Mac OS X)
    already include an SSH client.  Simply open a terminal or xterm window
    and type, "ssh your_login_name@grex.org".</p>

    <p>You can download one such program for Microsoft Windows
    <a href="http://the.earth.li/~sgtatham/putty/latest/x86/putty.exehere">
    here</a>. After downloading it to your Windows "Desktop", double
    click it to run. Our <q>Host Name</q> is: grex.org. Click the
    <q>Open</q> button and wait a few seconds for <strong>PuTTY</strong>
    to prompt you to accept our server's encryption key fingerprint.
    <strong>If</strong> the key you see in the PuTTY window is the same as the
    <a href="">key on our website</a> then click <q>Yes</q>. If you are
    creating a new user account, type <tt>newuser</tt> and follow the
    instructions provided. Else, type in your login and password.</p>

    <h2>What is Telnet?</h2>

    <p>Telnet programs are inherently insecure because they transmit
    unencrypted and easily readable data. Do not type in personal
    information (example: social security number) or financial data
    (eg: bank account details, password for a bank website) when using
    telnet. We no longer provide access via telnet.</p>

    <h2>Getting a Free SSH/Telnet Program</h2>

    <p>If you need to download and install an SSH program, the
    following programs are the ones that we recommend.  
    </p>

    <dl>
      <dt><strong>PuTTY</strong> (for all windows platforms)</dt>
      <dd>PuTTY is a free implementation of Telnet and SSH for Win32
      and Unix platforms, along with an xterm terminal emulator. It
      supports scp and sftp. If you are using a version of PuTTY
      earlier than 0.55, you should upgrade to 0.55. The latest
      version of PuTTY can be found at the author's website:
      <a href="http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/">http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/</a>.</dd>

      <dt><strong>TeraTerm</strong></dt>
      <dd>TeraTerm is another free Windows-based SSH and Telnet program.
      More information can be found
      <a href="http://ayera.com/teraterm/">here</a>.</dd>
    </dl>
  </div>

</div>
<div>
  <span id="revision">$Id: ssh.xhtml 1444 2014-03-23 18:01:57Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
