<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Putting Your Web Page on Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Putting Your Web Page on <span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p>Grex provides limited web page hosting for anyone with a Grex
  account. Some of the more important limits are:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>Limited data transfer capability; we are not Amazon-S3.</li>

    <li>CGI and SSI support only if you write scripts that <em>exit</em>
    quickly and are not CPU intensive</li>

    <li>Your pages are included in your <strong>100 MB</strong> user space
    limit.</li>

    <li>You still have to log in to your account every few months,
    in order to keep your account active.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>You can get started by running the <tt>mkhomepage</tt> command at a
  shell prompt on Grex. This will create the necessary <strong>www</strong>
  directory, and place a prototype home page in <strong>index.html</strong>
  for you to edit.</p>

  <p>There are many frequently asked questions about this service.
  Please <a href="wwwfaq.xhtml">read the WWW server
  FAQ</a> before sending mail to
  <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">webmaster@grex.org</a>
  with questions you may have about this service.</p>

  <p>Any Grex user who owns a web page, whether it is located on
  Grex or elsewhere, may have their site listed on our
  <a href="users.xhtml">directory of Grex Users' Web Pages</a>. Just
  send mail to <a href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org">webmaster</a>
  and specify the account and (if the page is not on Grex) the
  URL.</p>

  <p>Also, check out the <a href="stats/">Grex Web Server
  Statistics</a> to see how many hits your page is getting. This is
  updated every week. For more information about the web server and
  webmasters, please <a href="server.xhtml">follow this link</a></p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: www.xhtml 1419 2014-03-23 00:50:37Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
