<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex WWW FAQ</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a><span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span> WWW FAQ</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p>This is a compilation of questions frequently asked about
  web-based services on Grex.</p>

  <div id="toc">
  <ul>
    <li><a href="#q1">Can I create a home page on Grex?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q2">How do I get started?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q2a">What if I don't know HTML?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q3">How many pages / how much space can I have in
    my website?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q4">Why can't I find my page when I look from the
    net?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q5">Why can't I edit my page using the "<em>e</em>"
    command in Lynx?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q5a">How can I put my pages on Grex if I make
    them on my computer?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q7">Can I have HTML Forms on my page?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q8">How do I get my page listed in the Grex Users
    directory?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q9">If I have a page elsewhere, can I be listed
    on Grex?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q10">How do I know how many "hits" my page is
    getting?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q11">How can I put a counter on my page?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q12">Can I put links to conference items on my
    page?</a></li>

    <li><a href="#q13">Help, I forgot my Grex password!</a></li>
  </ul><a id="q1"></a>
  </div>
  <hr />

  <h3>Can I create a home page on Grex?</h3>

    <p>Yes, Grex permits users to have free use of our web server
    under certain conditions.</p>

    <ol>
      <li>We do not permit bandwidth intensive tasks
	  <p>This generally involves downloading large amounts of
          GIF, JPEG, WAV, AU, AIFF, MPEG, MOV, and possibly other
          file formats.</p></li>


      <li>We do not permit CPU intensive tasks
	  <p>This means that you cannot write scripts, process forms, or
	  implement gateways or counters, that hog the Grex
          processor.</p></li>

      <li>No commercial use.
	  <p>We <em>do permit</em> incidental commercial use
          such as an individual selling shareware, as long as it does
          not generate too much traffic.</p></li>

      <li>There is a traffic limit due to our small link.
	  <p>If activity on your site starts to approach
          <strong>10 MB/day</strong>, we will ask you to look for another site or
          start paying. Our link can only  stand so much. It is very
          slow. You will get <em>plenty of warning</em> in
          such an event.</p></li>

      <li>No violation of copyright and pornography laws.
          <p>You must not break the laws of the United States of
          America. Grex <em>will</em> report any violations to
          the proper authorities with all details available to us (your
          name, address, files on Grex, IP address, etc)</p></li>
    </ol>

    <p>In short: a user home-page with <em>your</em> resume
    and a few of <em>your</em> pics, music, programs and
    art-work, with a few friends and family visiting won't get you in
    any trouble with our staff.</p>

    <p>Please note: we <em>want</em> to make Grex as useful to
    the general public as possible, but our activities are curtailed by
    resources available to us (money, staff time, volunteers). Please
    consider <a href="member.xhtml">donating</a> and
    <a href="staff/volunteer.xhtml">volunteering</a> to help with day to  day
    activities.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q2"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>How do I get started?</h3>

    <p>First, you must create an account for yourself on Grex. Just
    <a href="ssh://grex.org">SSH to Grex</a> and log in as
    <em>newuser</em>, or else
    <a href="/newuser/">create your account on the web</a>.
    You may also be able to use our 
    <a href="https://grex.org/mindterm/applet.html">MindTerm Java Client</a> 
    to connect from a web browser.  
    </p>

    <p>Once you have your account, and you can log in to Grex via
    SSH, then you run the <tt>mkhomepage</tt> program. This
    program gives you the option of creating a prototype home page. If
    your shell is not a unix shell, you must type a <tt>!mkhomepage</tt>
    in order to run it.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q2a"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>What if I don't know HTML?</h3>

    <p>If you don't know HTML, you are not going to be able to write a
    web page. HTML is the language used to produce web documents, and
    no one is going to convert your documents to HTML for you.</p>

    <p>Fortunately, it is rather simple to learn the basics of HTML,
    and there is a wealth of information on the net. Just do a few
    searches for <q>HTML Tutorial</q> to get started.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a><a id="q3"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>How many pages / how much space can I have in my website?</h3>

    <p>You can put any pages that you wish to be visible on
    the web into your <strong>www</strong> directory. Your home page
    should be named <strong>index.html (or index.htm)</strong>, but you
    may have as many pages with as many different names as you like, so
    long as you do not exceed the <em><strong>100 MB</strong> disk space
    limit</em> for your account.</p>

    <p>Each page will have a different URL. Your home page can be
    found at <em>http://www.grex.org/~youraccount/</em> and any
    other page can be found at
    <em>http://www.grex.org/~youraccount/filename</em>.</p>

    <p>For links between the pages of your site, it is best to use
    relative links in your hypertext links. This means you should not
    link to a file using the full URL, like this:
    <strong>&lt;a href="http://www.grex.org/~youraccount/filename"&gt;</strong>,
    but rather you should use the much simpler form
    <strong>&lt;a href=filename&gt;</strong>.
    Of course you must use the full link in a pointer from another
    site.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q4"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>Why can't I find my page when I look from the net?</h3>

    <p>There are three possible problems:</p>
    <ol>
      <li>You didn't put it in your <strong>www</strong> directory.
      <p>If you use <em>lynx</em> on Grex, you can view any page with
      it that you have read access to. That is because lynx is
      reading the page directly. If you try to access the page via
      Grex's web server, the page must be located in the
      <strong>www</strong> directory or it will not be visible.</p></li>

      <li>You are not using the proper URL for your page.
      <p>If a page named <em>foo.html</em> is in your
      <strong>www</strong> directory,
      its full path is ~youraccount/www/foo.html, but the URL for
      it has no "<em>www</em>" because it is assumed by the web server
      that files must be in the <strong>www</strong> directory. So its
      URL would be
      <em>http://www.grex.org/~youraccount/foo.html</em>.</p>

      <p>URLs of the form
      <em>http://www.grex.org/a/y/o/youraccount/www/foo.html</em>
      do not work.</p></li>

      <li>Your permissions are not correct.
      <p>If you have changed the permissions on either your home
      directory or your <strong>www</strong> directory to
      "<em>700</em>", the web server will not be able to see your files.
      Both your home directory and www directory must have at least the
      "<strong>x</strong>" bit set, or your pages will not be visible on the web.
      Use permissions of "<em>711</em>" on each directory if you do not
      wish to allow other people to see what files are there, and use
      "<em>755</em>" if you do. "<em>700</em>" will render your files
      inaccessible.</p></li>
    </ol>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q5"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>Why can't I edit my page using the "e" command in Lynx?</h3>

    <p>There are two possible problems:</p>

    <ol>
      <li>You must specify to lynx which editor you want to use. You
      do this by typing the "<strong>o</strong>" command to bring up the options
      page, then select "<em>editor</em>" and specify which unix editor
      you want to use (examples, pico, vi, joe, emacs).</li>

      <li>You must be accessing the page you want to edit locally,
      and not through the web server. Lynx cannot edit pages it
      fetches through the web server. Thus, if you are pointing to
      the page with an http URL, you will not be able to edit it. You
      can solve this problem by starting lynx with an argument on the
      linend (for example <em>lynx www/index.html</em>) or by using a
      local file URL (for example, type the "<strong>g</strong>" command in lynx,
      and specify
      <em>file://localhost/a/y/o/youraccount/www/index.html</em> to
      bring up your page. If your page has a <em>file:</em> URL, it
      will be editable in lynx. You can save this URL in your
      <em>bookmarks</em> file so you do not have to type it in each
      time.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q5a"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>How can I put my pages on Grex if I make them on my computer?</h3>

    <p>If you are connecting to Grex from the internet,
    you should use ftp to transfer your file to Grex. If you have a
    direct internet connection, you should be able to run an ftp
    client on your PC. If you are dialing into a remote host to gain
    access to the net, you must first transfer your files to your
    host system using a file transfer protocol supported by your
    terminal emulator software, and then use ftp to move them from
    there to your grex account.</p>

    <p>Remember to log into grex with your account and password. Grex
    does not support anonymous ftp.</p>

    <p>Also remember to put the files into your <strong>www</strong>
    directory, not your <em>home</em> directory.</p>

    <p>If you dial into grex directly, use a file transfer protocol
    such as <em>sz or kermit</em> to move the files to your
    <strong>www</strong> directory.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q6"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>Can I have HTML Forms on my page?</h3>

    <p>In order to support HTML forms, you must provide a CGI script
    or program to process the form. Grex's web server does not support
    CGI programs written by Grex users <em>if they consume
    lots of CPU time</em>. Therefore the only way you could have a form
    on your Grex page is if it is pointed to a cgi program on some other
    server, or if it is written in such a way as to reduce the work our
    CPUs have to do; write your CGI in such a way that the process
    <em>exits</em> and make sure it <em>cannot be misused</em> by other
    Grex users. Without that, the answer is no.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q8"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>How do I get my page listed in the Grex Users directory?</h3>

    <p>If you have pages on Grex which are correctly set
    up and visible on the internet, You just have to write mail to
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">webmaster@grex.org</a>
    and ask to be listed.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q9"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>If I have a page elsewhere, can I be listed on Grex?</h3>

    <p>Yes, as long as you maintain a Grex account, you are a Grex user.
    Just send mail to <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">webmaster@grex.org</a>,
    requesting this. Be sure to include the URL you wish it point to.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q10"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>How do I know how many "hits" my page is getting?</h3>

    <p>Grex's web server keeps statistics. This information is published
    weekly, and it contains hit counts for all user pages with 10 or
    more hits per week. Look on the <a href="/stats/">statistics page</a>.</p>

    <p>Information is only available in summary form. The detail
    records in the log file are not published or available.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q11"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>How can I put a counter on my page?</h3>

      <p>The answer to this question keeps changing. Have a look at the
      <a href="http://dir.yahoo.com/Computers_and_Internet/Internet/World_Wide_Web/Programming/Access_Counters/">
      Yahoo directory of free web counters</a>. You should be able to
      use one of the counters described there on your Grex web pages
      without violating any rules.</p>

      <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q12"></a></p>

    <hr />

    <h3>Can I put links to conference items on my page?</h3>

      <p>Yes, if
      you want to put a pointer to your favorite Grex item or
      conference on your web page, you can do it. A link to the
      <tt>Agora</tt> conference would have the URL:</p>

      <p><a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek:agora">https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Aagora%3A2</a></p>

      <p>Just replace the name <q>Agora</q> with whatever conference
      you want to link to.</p>

      <p>This will put anyone who clicks it into the conference via
      <a href="/cgi-bin/backtalk/">Backtalk</a>.
      They will be in read-only mode, so people without Grex accounts
      will be able to look at the conference. If they are using a
      non-graphical browser like lynx, it will put them in the
      <em>vanilla</em> interface. Otherwise the <em>pistachio</em>
      interface is used.</p>

      <p>You can also link to a specific item in a conference. Below is
      the URL for a link to item 2 in the agora conference:</p>

      <p><a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek:agora:2">https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Aagora%3A2</a></p>

      <p>Or you can link to a specific response to a specific
      item. Here is a link to response 8 of item 1 in the agora
      conference:</p>

      <p><a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek:agora:1:8">https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Aagora%3A1%3A8</a></p>

      <p>You can also link to ranges of responses. The
      following URL links to responses 0 (that's the item text), 3, and
      7 through 12 of item one of the agora conference:</p>

      <p><a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek:agora:1:0,3,7-12">https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Aagora%3A1%3A0,3,7-12</a></p>

      <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a> <a id="q13"></a></p>

  <hr />

  <h3>Help, I forgot my Grex password!</h3>

    <p>For issues that aren't specificly related to the web or Grex's
    web server, you would be much better off sending mail to
    <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>, instead
    of webmaster. While a Webmaster can probably help you out, or
    answer your questions, there are many more staffers reading the
    staff mailbox.. So mail sent to staff is more likely to be read
    and answered quickly than mail sent to webmaster.</p>

    <p><a href="#top">Return to the table of contents</a></p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: wwwfaq.xhtml 1548 2016-09-25 15:09:10Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
