<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Installing JRE</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Installing JRE</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="../contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    This page describes the install process for Sun's (now Oracle's)
    Java Runtime Environment (JRE). JRE is essential if you want to use
    our MindTerm Java applet to SSH into Grex.

    <h4>Java (JRE) Installation</h4>
    <ol>
      <li><a href="#installed">Is JRE installed?</a></li>
      <li><a href="#download">Download &amp; Install JRE</a></li>
      <li><a href="#troubleshoot">Troubleshoot the JRE install</a></li>
    </ol>
    <hr />

    <h4 id="installed">Is JRE installed?</h4>
      <p>You need to check if Java is already present on your 
      computer.</p>
      <p><b>in Windows:</b>
        <ol>
          <li>Click on: <tt class="menu">Start --> Program Files --> Control Panel</tt></li>
          <li>A rectangular window should pop-up.</li> 
          <li>Look within this window and double click:
          <tt class="menu">Add Remove Programs</tt></li>
          <li>A new window will pop-up, which contains a list of 
          installed applications. Check too if Java (JRE) is in the list</li>
        </ol>
      </p>

      <p><b>in Debian:</b>
      <samp>
        <tt>dpkg -l|grep -i jre</tt><br />
        <tt>dpkg --status sun-java6-jre</tt>
      </samp></p>

      <p><b>in Centos &amp; Fedora:</b> 
      <samp>
         <tt>rpm -qa|grep -i jre</tt><br />
         <tt>rpm -qi packagename</tt>
      </samp></p>


    <h4 id="download">Download and Install JRE to desktop</h4>
      <p>JRE can be downloaded from Oracle's website, or from 
      <a href="http://java.com/en/download/">this website</a>. However
      it would be best to use your distributions package manager to do 
      the download and install.</p>

      <p><b>in Windows:</b>
      Windows doesn't come with a software package manager so you need
      to download the Java (JRE) package (.exe file) using the above 
      mentioned link. Then double click the installation file you 
      just downloaded to start the install process.</p>

      <p><b>in Debian:</b>
      <samp>
        <tt>apt-cache search jre</tt><br />
        <tt>apt-get install package-name</tt>
      </samp></p>

      <p><b>in Centos, Fedora</b>
      <samp>
        <tt>yum list jre</tt><br />
        <tt>yum update package-name</tt>
      </samp></p>

    <h4 id="troubleshoot">Troubleshoot your Java Installation</h4>
      <ol>
      <li>See if the Grex Java MindTerm applet loads within your browser by
        <a href="/mindterm/applet.html">clicking on this link</a></li>
      <li>A window should pop-up asking you for permission to run the applet
        or application, because its <q>digital signature</q> has expired. Click:
        <tt class="menu">Run</tt></li>
      <li>A window should pop-up asking you to accept a 
        <q>MindTerm - License agreement</q>. Click: <tt class="menu">Accept</tt></li>
      <li>If steps 2 &amp; 3 don't happen and if you have Java installed, then read our
        <a href="networkconnectivity.xhtml">network troubleshooting</a> page</li>
      <li>If nothing works <a href="troubleshoot.xhtml">ask for help</a></li>
      </ol>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: installjre.xhtml 1018 2010-12-13 16:32:00Z veek $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
