<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Troubleshooting: network</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Network Connectivity</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="../contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <ol>
    <li>Access your Command Prompt

      <p><b>In Windows:</b> Click: <tt class="menu">Start</tt> [bottom
      left corner] and <tt class="menu">Run</tt>; type: <tt>cmd.exe</tt>
      and press the <tt>ENTER</tt> key. A dark black window should open
      - this is the Microsoft Windows <em>DOS command prompt</em>.</p>

      <p><b>In UNIX:</b> Login to UNIX; if you are using the UNIX
      Graphical User Interface (GUIs - KDE, GNOME, X Windows) then you
      need to start a terminal emulator (look for the following
      key-words within your Desktop's menu: 
      <em>Konsole, Rxvt, Eterm, Xterm, Terminal and Gnome Terminal</em>.
      </p></li>

    <li>Ping &amp; Traceroute
      <p>Within the terminal emulator window, type:
      <tt>ping grex.org</tt>. You should see ping output similar to 
      this:</p>

      <pre>
        localhost> ping cyberspace.org
        PING cyberspace.org (216.86.77.194) 56(84) bytes of data.
        64 bytes from grex.cyberspace.org (216.86.77.194): icmp_seq=1 ttl=240 time=292 ms
        64 bytes from grex.cyberspace.org (216.86.77.194): icmp_seq=2 ttl=240 time=296 ms
        64 bytes from grex.cyberspace.org (216.86.77.194): icmp_seq=3 ttl=240 time=295 ms
      </pre>
      
      <p>Note that our server IP Address, as of this writing, is: 
      <strong>216.86.77.194</strong>.</p> 

<!--Our current IP Address can be found <a href="/cgi-bin/sysinfo.cgi">here</a>.</p -->
      
      <p>If you are able to resolve grex.org and view our server
      IP through ping, this it means DNS (Domain Name Service) is 
      configured properly and is working. </p>

      <p><strong>64 bytes from grex</strong> implies that your ping 
      command received a response from our server - this implies that
      network-connectivity between your computer and our <q>Grex</q>
      server exists.</p></li>
    </ol>
    <hr />


    <h4>If DNS is not working:</h4>
      <p>You know that your DNS is not configured properly if you don't
      see grex.org's IP Address when you ping our server (Step 2). There
      are a number of reasons for this:</p>

      <ol>
      <li><p><b>If browsing works</b>, this means that your browser is 
        using a "Proxy Server" and DNS was never configured on your 
        computer.</p>

        <p>You need to check your <q>Network Settings</q> and add a DNS
        server. <a href="http://opendns.org">OpenDNS.org</a> is a free
        DNS server and uses the following IP addresses:
        <strong>208.67.222.222, 208.67.220.220</strong>.This step is
        essential if you are using <em>ssh</em>.  If for some
        reason you are not able to configure DNS, you can still connect
        by using the Grex server's IP address instead of its
        hostname.</p> 
      
        <p>To SSH you would type the following: 

          <samp>
           <tt>ssh jsmith@216.86.77.194</tt><br /> 
           <tt>ssh newuser@216.86.77.194</tt> 
          </samp></p>

        <p>Note: You must replace <strong>216.86.77.194</strong> with
        our <!--a href="/cgi-bin/sysinfo.cgi"-->current IP Address<!--/a-->.</p>
        </li>
      
      <li><p><b>If you are using Java &amp; MindTerm</b> to connect to
        the Grex UNIX shell using your web browser:</p> 
        
        <p>if the Java applet window appears, this implies that the
        browser was able to locate the Java Runtime Environment (JRE)
        and download, load and execute the applet.</p>
        
        <p>Click on: <tt class="menu">Settings</tt> [menu - top], 
        <tt class="menu">Proxy...</tt>. 
        A <tt class="menu">MindTerm - Proxy Settings</tt> box should 
        open; specify the <tt>Proxy type:</tt> you are using - this 
        information can be found in your web-browser settings. Then 
        specify your <tt>Server:</tt>, <tt>Port:</tt>, proxy 
        <tt>Username:</tt>, and proxy <tt>Password:</tt>, if any.</p>

        <p>Note: that when the MindTerm applet successfully opens,
        <tt>SSH Server/Alias: cyberspace.org</tt> will be visible and
        you would need to click within the window and press the
        <tt>Enter</tt> key to connect. If you are able to connect to our
        Grex server, you will see output similar to this:</p>

        <pre>
        SSH Server/Alias: cyberspace.org
        Connected to server running SSH-2.0-OpenSSH_5.6

        Server's hostkey (ssh-rsa) fingerprint:
        openssh md5:  75:cc:a7:b5:b8:6a:6a:cc:a6:71:20:8d:ed:df:62:72
        bubblebabble: xuhaf-vohof-zydum-gacuz-medek-zivef-kyvol-bacal-gupan-nyhyk-texux

        File operations disabled, server identity can't be verified

        cyberspace.org login: jsmith
        </pre></li>
        </ol>
    <hr />
 

    <h4>Local firewall blocks access to Grex</h4>
      <p>It is possible that your firewall at work, or on your home
      computer, blocks our SSH server port (port number 22).  If it cannot
      be unblocked, then you'll need to try another computer which allows
      SSH connections.
      </p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: networkconnectivity.xhtml 1018 2010-12-13 16:32:00Z veek $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
