<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex Staff Notes: Introduction</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
  <h1>NOTE: These notes are historical only!</h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p>Grex moved away from the system described in these notes long
  ago. It is now running on far more modern hardware (as of mid-2017
  an x86 based machine) and far more modern software (as
  of mid-2017, a modern BSD). Grex is also in considerably healthier
  financial shape than when these notes were written, and buys new
  hardware from various vendors, rather than bottom-feeding used
  stuff. Similarly, demand on Grex's resources has decreased over
  the years, as Unix access has become less novel. The supply of
  Sun hardware that used to be kept around has largely disappeared
  as Grex moved out of its old home and into a co-location facility
  years ago. Finally, all of the dialin lines have gone away, as
  dialin itself is pretty much a rarity these days</p>

  <p>That said, these notes may still be of interest to some, if
  only as an historical reminder of how one group did a lot with
  very little, and overcame many technical challenges. Hence, it is
  presented here, in near-original format, with notes such as this
  one preceeding the information to describe the ways in which Grex
  has evolved.</p>

  <h1>Grex Staff Notes: Introduction</h1>

  <p>This series of web pages is produced by the Grex Staff to
  describe various administrative and technical matters related to
  Grex. These pages are meant as a way for staff members to share
  knowledge and information about how Grex works both with other
  staff members and the general public.</p>

  <p>Some of these pages are meant for the general reader, while
  others delve very deeply into technical details of how things
  work on Grex.</p>

  <p>Grex's staff believes that good system security should not
  depend on obscurity. Therefore, there is quite a lot of detailed
  information included here about things like how passwords are
  stored on Grex.</p>

  <p>We encourage anyone who has comments or suggestions about the
  contents of these pages to send mail to
  <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>. Please send
  questions about Grex to <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>,
  not to individual members of the staff. Many staffers are swamped
  with too much e-mail and may reply very slowly or not at all.</p>

  <h2>Grex's Staffers</h2>Grex has always been staffed entirely by
  volunteers. Staff members don't have fixed areas of
  responsibility, but tend to accumlate specific areas of primary
  activity. Currently, the staff consists of the following people:

  <table border="1">
    <tr>
      <th>Name</th>

      <th>Login</th>

      <th>Activities</th>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Glenda Andre</td>

      <td>glenda</td>

      <td>General system configuration.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>STeve Andre</td>

      <td>steve</td>

      <td>General system configuration. Sun hardware. Security
      monitoring. Reaping expired accounts.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Walter Cramer</td>

      <td>i</td>

      <td>Conference administration.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Kip deGraaf</td>

      <td>kip</td>

      <td>General system configuration. Security monitoring. System
      backups. Reaping expired accounts.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Joe Gelinas</td>

      <td>gelinas</td>

      <td>Daily monitoring of system performance and staff mail.
      System backups. Reaping expired accounts. Network
      configuration.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Bruce Howard</td>

      <td>bhoward<br />
      bruce</td>

      <td>General system configuration. Daily monitoring of system
      performance. Security monitoring. Reaping expired
      accounts.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Charles Mitchell</td>

      <td>arthurp</td>

      <td>x86 hardware. Conference administration.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Marcus Watts</td>

      <td>mdw</td>

      <td>Author of picospan, newuser, and queuing telnet daemon.
      Maintainer of grex versions of sendmail, mail, login, passwd,
      finger, and fingerd. E-mail guru. Network configuration. Sun
      hardware.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Steve Weiss</td>

      <td>srw</td>

      <td>Co-author of backtalk. Webmaster. Staff mail. Password
      changes. Kernel blocks. FAQs.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Jan Wolter</td>

      <td>janc</td>

      <td>Author of party, write, gate, web-newuser, watch,
      orphaned process killer. Co-author of backtalk. Staff
      notes.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>Steve Gibbard</td>

      <td>scg</td>

      <td>Former staff member. Network configuration. Terminal
      servers.</td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <p>Past staff members include Dan Cross, Greg Cronau, Tom Dohne,
  Meg Geddes, Michelangelo Giansiracusa, Steve Gibbard, Dan
  Gryniewicz, Scott Helmke, Rob Henderson, Jeff Kaplan, Dave
  Lovelace, Valerie Mates, Mike McNally, Carl Miller, Michael
  O'Leary, John Remmers, TS Taylor and Marc Unangst.</p>

  <p>Several people assist in the running of Grex but do not have
  superuser access. Ryan Antkowiak (ryan), Eric Bassey (other),
  Nissa Austad (snow), and Jill (beamer) are party administrators.
  Morena Vasquez (munkey) is a webmaster. Mary Remmers is the Grex
  archivist. A number of other users, including Jared Mauch, Rob
  Argy, Mike McNally, Klaus Wolter, Mark Conger, Dave Martinelli,
  and Sri (nt) have been very helpful in assisting the Grex staff
  in various ways, as have all the users who volunteer as helpers,
  assisting other users with problems.</p>

  <h2>Staff Notes</h2>

  <dl>
    <dt><a href="http://www.unixpapa.com/grextech/pumpkin/">A Tour
    of the Pumpkin</a></dt>

    <dd>Photos of Grex's computer room, with descriptions of our
    equipment.</dd>

    <dt><a href="about.xhtml">About Grex's Hardware and
    Software</a></dt>

    <dd>An overview of the hardware Grex runs on, and the software
    customizations we have installed.</dd>

    <dt><a href="http://www.unixpapa.com/newgrex/">Grex 2003
    Assembly Notes</a></dt>

    <dd>Construction of Grex's future computer.</dd>

    <dt><a href="goals.xhtml">Security Goals</a></dt>

    <dd>A general description of Grex's security.</dd>

    <dt><a href="privacy.xhtml">Privacy on Grex</a></dt>

    <dd>A discussion of the kinds of circumstance under which
    Grex's staff might look at private user files or E-mail.</dd>

    <dt><a href="blocks.xhtml">The Kernel Blocks</a></dt>

    <dd>A detailed description of how Grex's Kernel has been
    modified to enforce our restrictions on outgoing telnet and ftp
    connections.</dd>

    <dt><a href="passwd.xhtml">The Password Database</a></dt>

    <dd>A detailed description of how passwords are stored and
    encrypted on Grex.</dd>

    <dt><a href="eggdrop.xhtml">Eggdrop on Grex</a></dt>

    <dd>A FAQ discussing why we do not support or allow eggdrop on
    Grex.</dd>

    <dt><a href="volunteer.xhtml">Volunteering</a></dt>

    <dd>Information for people who would like to help the Grex
    staff, or perhaps join the ranks.</dd>

    <dt><a href="/~invent/index.cgi">Equipment Inventory</a></dt>

    <dd>A list of the equipment currently owned by Cyberspace
    Communications.</dd>

    <dt><a href="forsale.xhtml">Equipment For Sale or
    Swap</a></dt>

    <dd>A list of the computer equipment Grex has that we would
    like to get rid of.</dd>

    <dt><a href="wishlist.xhtml">Equipment Wish List</a></dt>

    <dd>A list of the computer equipment Grex is looking for.</dd>
  </dl>

  <div id="history">
  <h6>Document History:</h6>
  <p>
    Jul 18, 2008: Dan Cross (cross) -
      Updated to reflect historical nature.<br />

    Jun 4, 2005: Joe Gelinas (<a href="mailto:gelinas@grex.org">gelinas</a>) -
      Updated staff list.<br />

    Feb 9, 2004: Joe Gelinas (<a href="mailto:gelinas@grex.org">gelinas</a>) -
      Updated staff list.<br />

    Jul 30, 2003: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@grex.org">janc</a>) -
      Updated staff list.<br />

    Nov 8, 1999: Michelangelo Giansiracusa
      (<a href="mailto:spooked@grex.org">spooked</a>) -
      Updated staff list.<br />

    Nov 4, 1999: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@grex.org">janc</a>) -
      Updated staff list.<br />

    Jan 14, 1999: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@grex.org">janc</a>) -
      Updated staff list.<br />

    Jul 10, 1998: Steve Weiss (<a href="mailto:srw@grex.org">srw</a>) -
      Added "volunteering" note.<br />

    Apr 9, 1998: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@grex.org">janc</a>) -
      Added Overview page.<br />

    Mar 9, 1998: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@grex.org">janc</a>) -
      Added Eggdrop page.<br />

    Aug 21, 1997: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@grex.org">janc</a>) -
      Initial Revision.<br />
  </p>
  </div>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: index.xhtml 1607 2017-05-31 16:16:21Z cross $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
