<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex Staff Notes: Privacy on Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1>Grex Staff Notes: Privacy on Grex</h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p><a href="index.xhtml">[index]</a></p>

  <p>The Grex staff very strongly believes in protecting the privacy
  of our users. Users should feel reasonably confident that their
  files and E-mail will not be looked at either by other users or by
  the Grex staff. It is not possible, however, for us to give any
  unconditional promises that the Grex staff will never look at a
  user's files.</p>

  <p>This document is meant to describe our thinking about the
  kinds of circumstances under which staff might look at, or
  distribute, private information about our users. Rather then
  describe a rigid set of rules, it is a fairly exhaustive list of
  the situations under which staff does use root access to look at
  user's data. From time to time new situations come up that the
  staff hasn't ever had to think about before. Such situations are
  handled in a manner generally consistent with the examples listed
  here.</p>

  <p>These situations <em>always</em> require judgment. There are
  some things that are clearly OK, and some things that are clearly
  not, but there are wide gray areas, where a staff member must use
  judgment. Often there is not time for staff members to discuss
  the situation, and whichever staff member is on the spot must
  make a judgment call.</p>

  <p>Grex's situation is in some ways unique:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>Many users are hard to identify with certainty.</li>

    <li>Grex has more than the usual number of hostile users.</li>

    <li>Staff is volunteer, and does not always have time to handle
    crises.</li>
  </ul><p>There are several common situations may require a staff
  member to look at a user's mail or files.</p>

  <h2>Lost Passwords</h2>
      <p>Every day, several users forget their passwords and ask staff
      to reset them. Before resetting a password and mailing the
      new password out to someone, it is necessary to be reasonably
      sure that the person the password is sent to is the same
      person who originally created the account. Since many people
      give very little real information when they create an
      account, determining this can be challenging.</p>

      <p>In all cases, staff first tries to authenticate the person
      using public information (<tt>.plan</tt> files,
      <tt>.forward</tt> files, web pages, etc) or information
      explicitly given to staff (the newuser log files). They don't
      go further unless the user expresses some urgent desire to
      get back on the account (usually to access email sent there).
      Then, if the staff member feels inclined to believe that the
      user is who he claim and if that user requests it, a staff
      member may check to see if non-publicly readable files have
      the contents the user says they have, or if there are other
      clues to the owner's identity on the account.</p>

      <p>When a staff member does this, it is important to keep the
      search as narrow as possible, and not to repeat or reproduce
      any information found, no matter how trivial, particularly
      not to the presumed "owner" of the account.</p>

  <h2>User Assistance</h2>
      <p>Sometimes a user will have problems with their account, such
      as a screwed up <tt>.login</tt> or mailbox file. In such
      cases, users sometimes request a root to go in and fix it for
      them, either because their accounts are so broken that they
      can't access them or because they lack the knowledge to do it
      themselves.</p>

      <p>This is one of the clearest of the OK situations, but some
      caution is still required. The staff member should get
      <em>explicit</em> permission from the user, and should make
      clear to the user what kinds of stuff the staff member is
      likely to be looking at in the course of making repairs. The
      staff member should be reasonably confident that this is the
      real owner of the account, should try to look only at what
      needs to be looked at, and should not repeat or reproduce
      anything seen.</p>

  <h2>Users Causing Problems on Grex</h2>
      <p>Some users cause problems on the system by doing things like
      running programs that place a heavy load on the system or
      attempting to break into the system. When staff notices such
      things (which may be things with obvious effects on the
      usability of the system, or may just be subtle things that
      show up in our logs), it is often somewhat urgent to find and
      fix the problem. This may require looking into a user's
      directory without any form of permission from the user.</p>

      <p>NOTE: By "causing problems" we mean technical problems,
      not social problems. No degree of rudeness and unpleasantness
      would justify any staff investigation of a user's private
      files or mail. Only actions that appear to undermine system
      security or performance may do so.</p>

      <p>In many cases it is unclear if the user is causing
      problems deliberately or accidentally. If the user is running
      a program that slows down the system, for example, a staff
      member may have to look at the program to try to determine if
      it could be the cause of a problem, and if it is deliberately
      so or accidentally so. When staff looks at such a program,
      the goal should be exclusively to determine its intent and
      its impact on Grex. Copies should not be "borrowed"
      (exception: Grex staffers sometimes collect copies of
      programs designed to crash or crack the system for use in
      testing our system security), and detailed information about
      the program should not be repeated to anyone except other
      staffers.</p>

      <p>In cases where the problem appears accidental, staff
      generally tries to contact the user and advise him on how to
      avoid the problem in the future. Details of what staff may
      have seen are not repeated to anyone except other
      staffers.</p>

      <p>In cases where the problem appears deliberate, staff may
      look more broadly through the user's files to try to get a
      complete picture of what he may have been doing. Quite often
      relevant information is compiled and passed on to
      administrators of the sites the user uses to connect to Grex,
      and to other sites that may have been compromised by the
      user. Copies are likely to go to national organizations like
      CERT that track security problems. Grex staff may leave such
      accounts active, and may do more than the usual amount of
      monitoring of the activities of such users. However, even in
      these situations, staff will try to keep information
      unconnected with the problem private.</p>

  <h2>Users Causing Problems on Other Systems</h2>
      <p>Sometimes staff receives complaints about our users causing
      problems on other systems on the internet. All such
      complaints are taken with a degree of skepticism. The staff
      always tries to figure out who is doing the complaining, and
      insists on having enough details to judge the validity of the
      complaint. Staff does not necessarily launch an investigation
      every time someone somewhere complains about someone. There
      must be some kind of evidence that the problem is not
      completely imaginary.</p>

      <p>Among the most common complaints are those about users
      sending email that bothers someone. Staff will readily help
      people figure out if the email really came from Grex, and
      will give out information about Grex accounts that is
      publicly accessible to any Grexer (NOTE: this includes
      records of from where that user connects to Grex). Staff will
      not look into any private information in response to such
      complaints.</p>

      <p>Complaints of Grex users attempting to crack other systems
      may trigger a more thorough investigation of their accounts
      on Grex, along the lines described in the previous
      section.</p>

    <h2>System Problems</h2>
      <p>Under very rare circumstances, problems with the system might
      lead us to more-or-less inadvertently see private files. For
      example, if Grex had a serious disk crash, and staff members
      were inspired to go to extreme lengths to recover user data
      from the dead disk, they might need to see some of that data
      in the course of reconstructing it. Similarly, a really ugly
      failure of the mail system might require that staff look at
      the mail that it failed on.</p>

      <p>In this kinds of situations, staff members should make an
      effort to find ways of dealing with system problems that do
      not require actually looking at private information, and they
      should not divulge any information they might run across.</p>

  <h2>System Usage Research</h2>
      <p>To do a good job of supporting our users, the staff needs to
      have a good idea of how they use Grex. So staff sometimes
      gathers of data about how people are using Grex. For example,
      if Grex were considering eliminating a particular service,
      the staff might collect information about which users are
      using it. They might use the list of names to contact the
      users asking for their input or advising them of a change.
      They might publish statistics about how many users use a
      service. However, staff would not publish a list of names of
      people using a service.</p>

      <p>This kind of research should be done only when it serves
      some direct end. It shouldn't be just to satisfy idle
      curiosity.</p>

  <h2>Cooperation with Legal Authorities</h2>
      <p>If Grex's staff is contacted by law enforcement officials
      they will cooperate with any legal search for information on
      Grex. Grex staff will freely give out any public information
      that is already available to any Grex user (including records
      of when people logged in and from where they did so) and will
      assist in the understanding and interpretation of such
      information. Private information, such as the contents of a
      user's personal files and mail, would be made available only
      if a valid search warrant were provided.</p>

      <p>Grex's staff will not normally try to act on their own
      judgments on issues like libel and slander. People with
      problems of that sort should work through the proper legal
      authorities, and Grex's staff will cooperate with those
      authorities.</p>

      <p>Though generally the Grex staff tries to keep anything
      they see when looking at private files secret, a staff member
      might someday see something that he or she feels must be
      reported to the authorities. This would be a difficult
      decision depending very much on the particulars of the case.
      Grex has no fixed policy on how such cases should be dealt
      with.</p>

  <p>Staff's actions will also in general be influenced by their
  judgment of how private a piece of data might be. Generally, one
  should assume that any file that is not permitted to be readable
  by all users is meant to be private. However, if it is something
  like a <tt>.login</tt> file (a file full of Unix commands that is
  automatically executed when the logs in) then staff tends to be
  less scrupulous about privacy issues than if it is something like
  a mail file. However, staff members need to be careful even in
  looking at things that don't seem very sensitive. Things that
  don't seem very private to us could still seem that way to the
  user.</p>

  <p>When staff does have to look at private information, the basic
  principle is to look as narrowly as possible. For example,
  instead of looking at a person's entire mail file, one would use
  a program to extract and display <em>only</em> the information
  being sought.</p>

  <p>Remember, it is always possible for new situations to come up,
  and it is always possible for staff members to make mistakes.
  However scrupulous the staff tries to be, users are advised to
  protect their privacy by <em>not</em> storing or sending
  extremely sensitive private information through Grex (or any
  other computer that you personally don't completely control).</p>
  </div>

  <div id="history">
  <h6>Document History:</h6>
  <p>Jun 2, 1997: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
    Initial Revision for staff review based on staff discussion.</p>

  <p>Jun 8, 1997: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
    Updated with staff comments. Posted for user discussion.</p>

  <p>Aug 21, 1997: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
    Updated to reflect user and staff comments.</p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: privacy.xhtml 1454 2014-03-26 23:24:04Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
