<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex: New User Account Creation</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Create an Account on <span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                               
    <ul>                                                                        
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>  
      <li><a href="../grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>                  
      <li><a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>  
      <li><a href="../faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>                        
      <li><a href="../member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>         
      <li><a href="../contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>             
    </ul>                                                                       
  </div> 

  <div id="content">

    <h3>The Short Answer</h3>

    <p>You must create your own account by using SSH to login to
    "newuser@grex.org". There is no password.  You can use a command
    line ssh client or a client like PuTTY (in which case the username
    is "newuser" and the host is "grex.org" and password is left
    blank). Answer the questions and provide a valid e-mail address.
    You'll receive an e-mail with a temporary password. Your new account
    will be all but worthless for doing anything with Unix, so you'll
    want to get "validated" and have a full Unix shell.  Send an e-mail
    to porters@grex.org and request validation.  Be sure to include
    in this e-mail your Grex user name from the account you created
    when you ran the newuser program.  This user name will also be in
    the e-mail you received with your temporary password. Do not send
    requests to validate accounts which do not exist. Try logging in
    with the temporary password before requesting validation. If
    there are issues send them to help@grex.org.</p>

    <p>Be patient.  The validation process is done by human beings.
    It may take a day or more in some cases to validate your account.</p>

    <h3>The Details</h3>

    <p>With very few exceptions, Grex staff will not create accounts for
    users!  Users create their own accounts by successfully completing
    Step 1 below.  If you want access to more Unix commands, you need to
    request it.  See Step 2 below.</p>

    <p>If you are validly unable to set up your own account, let us know 
    why and we can help.</p>

    <p>BE AWARE: GREX DOES NOT ALLOW BOTS, BOUNCERS or PROXY
    CONNECTIONS. Please don't ask us how to make these work. Grex
    does allow the use of IRC clients. Grex has several such
    clients installed, including epic, irssi, sirc, and ircII.  Please
    see <a href="../faq.xhtml#irc">the Grex FAQ on IRC.</a> and
    <a href="../faq.xhtml#sshproxy">the Grex FAQ on SSH proxy
    connections.</a></p>

    <h3>1. Create An Account</h3>

    <p>Grex's web-based new account creation system is currently being
    replaced. In the meantime, please create your own account on Grex
    by using SSH to login to the "newuser@grex.org" account. Leave the
    password blank, when prompted for one. If connecting with a terminal
    application such a PuTTY, then the username is "newuser", the host
    is "grex.org" and the password is left blank. Answer the questions
    and be sure to provide a valid e-mail address. Failure to provide a
    valid e-mail address will result in your account not being created.
    A valid e-mail address helps later if you need a password reset
    because we will look to see if the request comes from the e-mail
    address used to register the account.
    </p>

    <p>Upon successful creation of your account, you will have very
    limited access to Unix shell commands. You will receive an e-mail
    with the login name you chose during the account creation process,
    and a temporary password. If you do not have a user name and did not
    receive an e-mail with your temporary password, then you did not
    successfuly complete the new user process and your account was not
    created on Grex.  Try Step 1 above again.</p>

    <p>If you did create an account with a user name and received the
    e-mail with your temporary password, make sure you can log in
    with the temporary password.  If so, you are ready to get increased
    access to more shell commands and other services.  Please follow
    Step 2. below. </p>

    <p>PLEASE NOTE: Grex staff will not create accounts for users!  Users
    create their own accounts as noted above. If you have a reason why
    you cannot follow the process listed here, let us know. We can, in
    rare instances, help with account creation.</p>

    <p>To see if the account you created exists, enter the login name
    in the box below and submit it (this does a Unix "finger" command
    on the username you enter). This will display public information
    about the account, if it exists. </p>

    <p>If no account information is returned, then your account does not
    exist on Grex.  Go back to Step 1 and try again.</p>

    <form action="/cgi-bin/ufinger" method="get" accept-charset="utf-8">
      <p>login: <input type="text" name="u" id="u" />
      <input type="submit" /></p>
    </form>

    <h3>2. Request Increased Access</h3>

    <p>Do you have an existing login name on Grex with very limited
    Unix command access, but want access to more commands and other
    services?  In order to avoid abuse, we require new users to go
    through a request process to get more access. By far the easiest
    way to get full, unrestricted access to Grex is to simply become a
    <a href="/member.xhtml">member</a> for a month for 2.00 USD (for
    6.00 USD, you get a three month membership that includes voting
    rights in the Grex organization.  For $18 you get a one year
    membership.  See: <a href="https://grex.org/member.xhtml">
    https://grex.org/member.xhtml</a>).</p>

    <p>You can let your membership lapse, if you like, but your access
    to Grex won't change unless you leave for an extended period of
    time, or somehow abuse the system.</p>

    <p>If you don't want to spend any money for more access, then you 
    can send email to <a href="mailto:porters@grex.org">porters@grex.org</a> 
    with an access request. You must have successfully completed the
    new account creation process in Step 1 above in order to do this.
    Don't forget to include your Grex login name in your e-mail request!
    Without it, we cannot increase your access to Grex. Your account
    will be restricted in outgoing access but you will still have
    access to most commands and a regular Unix shell.</p>

    <p>Our automated helpdesk ticket system will reply to your request
    e-mail by sending a ticket number.  Please do not reply to this
    automated response, or send additional e-mails for the same request
    to porters@grex.org as these while only create new helpdesk tickets
    (each of which will send you you an automated response).  The more
    tickets we need to review will just slow down your answer more.</p>

    <p>NOTE: Increased access is for accounts (with login names) which
    already exist on Grex.  Requesting validation of non-existent
    accounts will not result in a validated account.  If you do not
    have a Grex login name, follow the account creation instructions
    in Step 1 above. If you have a valid reason for not being able to
    create an account, let us know why and we can help.</p>

    <h3>Be Patient!</h3>

    <p>While we do our best to validate accounts within 24 hours,
    and often do so within minutes or a few hours, this is a volunteer
    organization.  Real people do the validation, not some automated
    system.  Our volunteers have lives and jobs that often consume
    most of their time. Holidays and work may interfere with their time
    available for Grex.  In some rare cases validation may take up to a
    week.  Sometimes we forget, too, so it doesn't hurt to check after
    a few days if your request is not completed. Thank you for your 
    understanding.</p>

  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: email.xhtml 1205 2011-12-06 20:15:03Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
