<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />
  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />
  <title>Grex: Staff Notes introduction</title>
  <script type="text/javascript"></script>
  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/default.css";
  </style>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a><span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span> Staff Notes: Introduction</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="../grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="../newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="../faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="../member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="../contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <p>
    This series of web pages is produced by the Grex Staff to describe
    various administrative and technical matters related to Grex. These
    pages are meant as a way for staff members to share knowledge and
    information about how Grex works both with other staff members and
    the general public.</p>
    <p>
    Some of these pages are meant for the general reader, while
    others delve very deeply into technical details of how things work
    on Grex.</p>
    <p>
    Grex's staff believes that good system security should not
    depend on obscurity. Therefore, there is quite a lot of detailed
    information included here about things like how passwords are
    stored on Grex.</p>
    <p>
    We encourage anyone who has comments or suggestions about the
    contents of these pages to send mail to
      <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>.
    Please send questions about Grex to
      <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>,
    not to individual members of the staff. Many staffers are swamped
    with too much e-mail and may reply very slowly or not at all.</p>
    <div id="staff">
      <h2>Grex's Staffers</h2>
      <p>Grex has always been staffed entirely by volunteers.
      Currently, the staff consists of the following people:</p>
      <div id="stafftable">
        <table>
          <tr>
            <th>Name</th>
            <th>Login</th>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Walter Cramer</td>
            <td>i</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Dan Cross</td>
            <td>cross</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Joe Gelinas</td>
            <td>gelinas</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Chuck Martin</td>
            <td>unicorn</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Kent Nassen</td>
            <td>kentn</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Tony Publiski</td>
            <td>tonster</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </div>
      <p>
      Past staff members include <strong>Glenda Andre, Steve Andre,
      Greg Cronau, Kip DeGraaf, Tom Dohne, Meg Geddes, Michelangelo
      Giansiracusa, Steve Gibbard, Dan Gryniewicz, Scott Helmke, Rob
      Henderson, Bruce Howard, Jeff Kaplan, Dave Lovelace, Valerie
      Mates, Mike McNally, Carl Miller, Charles Mitchell, Michael
      O'Leary, John Remmers, TS Taylor, Marc Unangst, Marcus Watts,
      Steve Weiss and Jan Wolter</strong>.</p>
      <p>
      Several people assist in the running of Grex but do not have
      superuser access. <strong>Ryan Antkowiak (ryan), Eric Bassey
      (other), Nissa Austad (snow), and Jill (beamer)</strong>
      are party administrators.  <strong>Mary Remmers</strong> is
      the Grex archivist. A number of other users, including
      <strong>Jared Mauch, Rob Argy, Mike McNally, Klaus
      Wolter, Mark Conger, Dave Martinelli, and Sri (nt)</strong>
      have been very helpful in assisting the Grex staff in various
      ways, as have all the users who volunteer as helpers,
      assisting other users with problems.</p>
    </div>
    <h2>Staff Notes</h2>
    <dl>
      <dt><a href="system.xhtml">Grex's Hardware and Software</a></dt>
      <dd>An overview of the hardware and software Grex runs on, and the
          configurations we have made.</dd>
      <dt><a href="http://www.unixpapa.com/newgrex/">Grex 2003 Assembly
          Notes</a></dt>
      <dd>Construction of Grex's 2003 computer.</dd>
      <dt><a href="security.xhtml">Security on Grex</a></dt>
      <dd>A general description of Grex's security and our goals.</dd>
      <dt><a href="privacy.xhtml">Privacy on Grex</a></dt>
      <dd>A discussion of the kinds of circumstance under which Grex's
          staff might look at private user files or email.</dd>
      <dt><a href="network.xhtml">Networking on Grex</a></dt>
      <dd>A description of Grex's policies regarding network access
          and configuration.</dd>
      <dt><a href="authentication.xhtml">Authentication on Grex</a></dt>
      <dd>A description of how password authentication on Grex works,
          with a discussion of how we migrated from our historical
          system.</dd>
      <dt><a href="bots.xhtml">Bots on Grex</a></dt>
      <dd>A FAQ discussing why we do not support or allow bots on
          Grex.</dd>
      <dt><a href="volunteer.xhtml">Volunteering</a></dt>
      <dd>Information for people who would like to help the Grex staff,
          or perhaps join the ranks.</dd>
      <dt><a href="/~invent/index.cgi">Equipment Inventory</a></dt>
      <dd>A list of the equipment currently owned by Cyberspace
          Communications.</dd>
    </dl>
  </div>
</div>

<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: index.xhtml 1593 2017-05-22 11:50:34Z cross $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
