<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />
  <!-- 11-20-98 srw - changed wording, www is available to non-members -->

  <title>Grex Activities Menu</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Grex Activities</h1>There are many things you can do on Grex.
  Here is a list of things you can try out.

  <ul>
    <li>Electronic <a href="picospan.html">Computer
    conferencing</a> using "PicoSpan". Grex was first established
    primarily for this purpose.</li>

    <li><a href="converse.html">Converse</a> with <a href=
    "lynxexec:who">other users</a> on Grex, or <a href=
    "lynxexec:write%20-c%20help">converse with a helper</a>.</li>

    <li><a href="email.html">Electronic Mail</a> or "email" is
    available so you can send or receive private messages to Grex
    users, or anywhere on the Internet.</li>

    <li>The <a href="lynxexec:change">change</a> program will let
    you change your shell, password, and other things.</li>

    <li><a href="/grex.xhtml">Information about Grex</a></li>

    <li>If you don't know what <a href=
    "netiquette/title.html">Netiquette</a> is, you'd better find
    out!</li>

    <li>Access to <a href="usenet.html">Usenet</a>, a world-wide
    public message exchanging system. (Usenet is currently not
    available on Grex, we hope to have it again soon. In the
    meantime, check out <a href=
    "http://www.dejanews.com/">http://www.dejanews.com</a> for
    access to newsgroups.)</li>

    <li><a href="internet.html">Internet Services</a> such as
    telnet, FTP, and IRC are also available, but membership is
    required.</li>

    <li>There is a collection of <a href="games.html">On-line
    games</a>, including <a href=
    "lynxexec:nethack">NetHack</a>.</li>

    <li><a href="utilities.html">Utilities</a> are available to
    perform a myriad of small useful jobs.</li>

    <li>Access to a <a href="shell.html">Unix shell</a>, with all
    standard commands, including full access to the C compiler,
    assembler, and other development tools.</li>

    <li>You can also <a href=
    "lynxexec:sh%20/usr/local/www/exec/rununix.sh">run a single
    Unix command</a> from here.</li>

    <li>Want to reward someone on Grex? Try sending them <a href=
    "lynxexec:mathom">mathom</a>.</li>

    <li>You can try our easy-to-use <a href="lynxexec:menu">menu
    shell</a>.</li>

    <li>You can use <a href=
    "lynxexec:sh%20/usr/local/www/exec/weblint.sh">weblint</a> to
    check your HTML code for errors.</li>
  </ul>
</body>
</html>
