<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>PicoSpan Summary</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Summary of PicoSpan Commands</h1>This page is under
  construction. (current update 18 April 94)

  <p>Valerie (popcorn) Mates posted the following information in
  item 1 of the info conference. I have harvested it and placed it
  here. I would welcome any attempts to add useful additional
  information to this page. -srw</p>

  <ul>
    <li>To see a list of the items in a conference, type
    "browse".</li>

    <li>To read item 17, type "read 17".</li>

    <li>To read, say, items 17 and 20 through 23 in a conference,
    type "read 17, 20-23".</li>

    <li>To read the items you haven't yet seen, type "read unseen".
    This is useful, say, if you join a conference with 10 items and
    you want to see all the items, not just items 1 and 10.</li>

    <li>To add a response to an item, type "r" at the "Respond or
    pass?" prompt. Picospan displays a "&gt;" prompt for you to
    enter text. Type your response. It's a good idea to press Enter
    (or Return) after every 75 characters or so. Picospan doesn't
    do word-wrap. When you are done entering text, type a period on
    a blank line, and press Enter (or Return).</li>

    <li>To get out from the middle of an item you are reading, type
    your interrupt character. That's usually either the delete key
    or control-c, but you could have set it to any of a number of
    other keys when you ran the newuser program.</li>
  </ul>When your interrupt gets you to the "Respond or pass?"
  prompt, here are some of your options:

  <ul>
    <li>Hit Enter to go on to the next item, leaving this item
    marked read.</li>

    <li>Type "forget" to never see this item again. (Later, you can
    type, for example, "unforget 12" at an "Ok:" prompt to bring
    item 12 back again)</li>

    <li>Type "postpone" to leave the responses in the item the way
    they were before you looked at it today, and go on to the next
    item you are reading.</li>

    <li>Type "new" to "postpone" the current item and get back to
    the "Ok:" prompt.</li>
  </ul>Now you're ready to go back to the previous menu and try out
  a picospan session. Have fun!
</body>
</html>
