<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>Interesting Topic</title>
</head>

<body>
  <pre>

                 How To Tell If Your Head's About To Blow Up

   From the WEEKLY WORLD NEWS, May 24, 1994

   MOSCOW -- Doctors are blaming a rare electrical imbalance in the brain for the
   bizarre death of a chess player whose head literally exploded in the middle of a
   championship game!

   No one else was hurt in the fatal explosion but four players and three officials
   at the Moscow Candidate Masters' Chess Championships were sprayed with blood and
   brain matter when Nikolai Titov's head suddenly blew apart. Experts say he
   suffered from a condition called Hyper-Cerebral Electrosis or HCE.

   "He was deep in concentration with his eyes focused on the board," says Titov's
   opponent, Vladimir Dobrynin. "All of a sudden his hands flew to his temples and
   he screamed in pain. Everyone looked up from their games, startled by the noise.
   Then, as if someone had put a bomb in his cranium, his head popped like a
   firecracker."

   Incredibly, Titiov's is not the first case in which a person's head has
   spontaneously exploded. Five people are known to have died of HCE in the last 25
   years. The most recent death occurred just three years ago in 1991, when
   European psychic Barbara Nicole's skull burst. Miss Nicole's story was reported
   by newspapers worldwide, including WWN. "HCE is an extremely rare physical
   imbalance," said Dr. Anatoly Martinenko, famed neurologist and expert on the
   human brain who did the autopsy on the brilliant chess expert. "It is a
   condition in which the circuits of the brain become overloaded by the body's own
   electricity. The explosions happen during periods of intense mental activity
   when lots of current is surging through the brain. Victims are highly
   intelligent people with great powers of concentration. Both Miss Nicole and Mr.
   Titov were intense people who tended to keep those cerebral circuits overloaded.
   In a way it could be said they were literally too smart for their own good."

   Although Dr. Martinenko says there are probably many undiagnosed cases, he
   hastens to add that very few people will die from HCE. "Most people who have it
   will never know. At this point, medical science still doesn't know much about
   HCE. And since fatalities are so rare it will probably be years before research
   money becomes available."

   In the meantime, the doctor urges people to take it easy and not think too hard
   for long periods of time. "Take frequent relaxation breaks when you're doing
   things that take lots of mental focus," he recommends.

</pre><a href=
"http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/mkgray/head-explode.html">Your Head
Might Explode</a> at www.mit.edu
</body>
</html>
