<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>What's New on Grex?</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>What's new on Grex?</h1>

  <h2>March 27, 1998</h2>If you have been using Grex for a while,
  and like it, consider sending in some money to ensure that it can
  continue to thrive. Right now there is a fundraiser going in
  agora item 28 (type "bbs" from a shell prompt, or "!bbs" from a
  menu, then "read 28 new"), to raise money for spare parts for the
  computer and to set up an email server. Any donation, no matter
  how small, is welcome. Nine pledges of $20 are all that is needed
  to reach the goal. Grex can run faster with your donations!

  <h2>March 22, 1998</h2>Grex's main computer was upgraded today to
  a dual-processor Sun 4/670 with 128 megabytes of memory and 6
  Gigabytes of disk. This machine should run about four times as
  fast as our old system.

  <p>At the same time Grex's operating system was upgraded to a
  later version (SunOS 4.1.4) and many of the other programs on the
  system were also upgraded to newer versions.</p>

  <p>Grex's mail directory was also reorganized into a hierarchical
  structure that should lead to further speed-ups.</p>

  <h2>December 13, 1997</h2>Ameritech changes the area code that
  Grex is operating in from 313 to 734. Grex's web pages are
  changed to show the new access number as (734) 761-3000. This
  only really affects people dialing Grex by as a long distance
  call, and will not become mandatory (replacing 313) for 6 months.

  <h2>October 18, 1997</h2>Grex's internet connection was upgraded
  today from a 33.6K modem to an ISDN B-channel. This more than
  doubles the available bandwidth for internet traffic, but the
  link is still expected to be somewhat saturated during peak
  periods.

  <p>We hope Grex users will see much better network performance
  with this new connnection.</p>

  <h2>July 16, 1997</h2>Grex turns six, this month!

  <h2>July 1, 1997</h2>The polls are open for voting on a proposed
  amendment to Grex's bylaws to allow organizations as well as
  individuals to become members. Type !vote at a bbs or menu
  prompt, or just plain vote at a Unix shell prompt, for further
  information or to cast a ballot. Before voting, folks are urged
  to familiarize themselves with the issues by reading Item 100 of
  the Coop conference, where the proposal is discussed.

  <h2>June 30, 1997</h2>Jan switched Grex's dial-ins over to No
  Parity, 8 data bits, and 1 stop bit, shortly after midnight. Grex
  is now more compatible with the rest of the world. If you dial in
  on Grex's modems, you may need to switch your settings in order
  to be able to connect.

  <h2>May 31, 1997</h2>The Grex Auction is now open for business!
  How can I participate in the Grex Auction? You ask.. Well
  <a href="../connect.html">Connect to Grex</a> - Login via
  <a href="telnet://cyberspace.org">telnet</a> , type 'bbs' at your
  prompt, at the OK prompt type 'join auction'. You can also use
  <a href="/backtalk.html">backtalk</a>, or dial (313)761-3000. Bid
  on cakes, Grex t-shirts, handmade earrings and more - to support
  Grex.
</body>
</html>
