<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator"
      content="HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content=
  "text/html; charset=utf-8" />

  <title>Plain Document</title>
  <meta name="doccomm" content="this is the plain document" />
  <meta name="Template" content=
  "C:\Program Files\Microsoft Office\Templates\SNR Standard\SNR-Plain.dot" />

<style type="text/css">
/*<![CDATA[*/
 body {
  background-color: white;
 }
 :link { color: #008080 }
 :visited { color: #800080 }
 div.c7 {margin-left: 2em}
 p.c6 {font-weight: bold; text-align: center}
 div.c5 {margin-left: 4em}
 li.c4 {list-style: none}
 div.c3 {margin-left: 8em}
 p.c2 {text-align: center}
 p.c1 {font-family: CG Times; text-align: center}
/*]]>*/
</style>
</head>

<body>
  <p class="c1">No. 99-2064</p>

  <p class="c2">In The</p>

  <p class="c2">UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS</p>

  <p class="c2">FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT</p>

  <p class="c2"><u></u></p>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications, Inc.; Abornet; Marty Klein; AIDS
  Partnership of Michigan; Art on the Net; Mark Amerika of Alt-X;
  Web Del Sol; Glad Day Bookshop, Inc.; Litline; American Civil
  Liberties Union,</p>

  <p>Plaintiffs-Appellees,</p>

  <div class="c3">
    <p>v.</p>
  </div>

  <p>John Engler, Governor of the State of Michigan; and Jennifer
  M. Granholm, Attorney General of the State of Michigan,</p>

  <p>Defendants-Appellants.</p>

  <p class="c2"><u></u></p>

  <p class="c2">Appeal from the United States District Court</p>

  <p class="c2">Eastern District of Michigan, Southern Division</p>

  <p class="c2">Honorable Arthur J. Tarnow</p>

  <p class="c2"><u></u></p>

  <p class="c2"></p>

  <p class="c2">BRIEF AMICI CURIAE OF AMERICAN BOOKSELLERS</p>

  <p class="c2">FOUNDATION FOR FREE EXPRESSION, ASSOCIATION OF</p>

  <p class="c2">AMERICAN PUBLISHERS, COMIC BOOK LEGAL DEFENSE</p>

  <p class="c2">FUND, FREEDOM TO READ FOUNDATION, INTERNATIONAL</p>

  <p class="c2">PERIODICAL DISTRIBUTORS ASSOCIATION, MAGAZINE</p>

  <p class="c2">PUBLISHERS OF AMERICA, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF</p>

  <p class="c2">COLLEGE STORES, PERIODICAL AND BOOK ASSOCIATION
  OF</p>

  <p class="c2">AMERICA, INC., PUBLISHERS MARKETING ASSOCATION</p>

  <p class="c2">AND RECORDING INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA</p>

  <p class="c2">IN SUPPORT OF PLAINTIFFS-APPELLEES AND FOR
  AFFIRMANCE</p>

  <p class="c2"><u></u></p>

  <p>MICHAEL A. BAMBERGER</p>

  <p>Sonnenschein Nath &amp; Rosenthal</p>

  <p>1221 Avenue of the Americas, 24<sup>th</sup> Floor</p>

  <p>New York, New York 10020-1089</p>

  <p>Of Counsel,						(212) 768-6700</p>

  <p>Christy Forth</p>

  <p class="c2"><u>DISCLOSURE OF CORPORATE AFFILIATIONS AND
  FINANCIAL INTEREST</u></p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <p>Pursuant to 6<sup>th</sup> Cir. R. 25, the <em>Amici</em>
  <em>Curiae</em> make the following disclosure:</p>

  <ol>
    <li>Are said parties subsidiaries or affiliates of a
    publicly-owned corporation? No, <em>amici</em> are not corporate
    entities for which a corporate disclosure statement would apply
    (<em>i.e.</em>, such entities do not have any parent corporations
    and/or any publicly-held company that owns 10% or more of its
    stock, <em>see</em> FRAP 26.1).</li>

    <li class="c4">
      <p>If the answer is YES, list below the identity of the
      parent corporation or affiliate and the relationship between
      it and the named party.</p>

      <p>&nbsp;</p>

      <p>&nbsp;</p>

      <p>&nbsp;</p>

      <p>&nbsp;</p>

      <p>&nbsp;</p>
    </li>

    <li>Is there a publicly-owned corporation, not a party to the
    appeal, that has a financial interest in the outcome? No.</li>
  </ol>

  <div class="c5">
    <p>If the answer is YES, list the identity of such corporation
    and the nature of the financial interest:</p>

    <p>&nbsp;</p>

    <p>&nbsp;</p>

    <p>&nbsp;</p>

    <p>&nbsp;</p>

    <p>&nbsp;</p>

    <p>&nbsp;</p>
  </div>

  <p><u></u></p>

  <p>Michael A. Bamberger</p>

  <p>Counsel for <em>Amici Curiae</em></p>

  <p>Dated:	February 3, 2000</p>

  <p class="c6"><u>THE <em>AMICI</em></u></p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <p>This brief <em>amici curiae</em> is submitted on behalf of a
  group of trade associations and their members, listed below and
  more fully described at Appendix A to this brief, that share a
  deep commitment to ensuring that the Internet achieves its full
  promise as a revolutionary medium of communication suitable for
  both children and adults. <em>Amici’s</em> members include authors,
  publishers, editors and distributors of textual, audio and
  audio-visual material ranging from books, magazines, newspapers,
  newsletters and comic books to sound recordings and video games,
  as well as educators and librarians whose students and patrons
  desire access to the widest possible range of informative
  material.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <p class="c6"><u>INTEREST OF THE <em>AMICI</em></u></p>

  <p><em>Amici’s</em> members (hereinafter "<em>amici</em>") have
  websites on the Internet and create scholarly, literary,
  artistic, scientific and entertaining content which appears on
  the websites of others. They are concerned lest a medium, which
  the United States Supreme Court has recognized to be a "dynamic,
  multifaceted category of communication" — the Internet — be
  turned into a child-proof medium whose "level of discourse" would
  be reduced to that "suitable for a sand box." This the First
  Amendment to the Constitution does not allow.</p>

  <p>Various of the <em>amici</em> have been plaintiffs in the
  federal court cases which have uniformly invalidated laws similar
  to the Michigan statutory provisions before this Court. <em>See
  ACLU v. Reno</em>, 521 U.S. 844 (1997) <em>aff’g</em> 929 F. Supp.
  824 (E.D. Pa. 1996) (invalidating the federal Communications
  Decency Act) ("<em>Reno I</em>") ("CDA"); <em>ACLU v. Johnson</em>,
  194 F.3d 1149 (10<sup>th</sup> Cir. 1999), <em>aff’g</em> 4 F.
  Supp.2d 1029 (D.N.M. 1998) (invalidating a New Mexico state
  statute) ("<em>Johnson</em>") ("New Mexico statute"); <em>ACLU v.
  Reno</em>, 31 F. Supp.2d 473 (E.D. Pa. 1999) (invalidating the
  federal Child Online Protection Act) ("<em>Reno II</em>"); and
  <em>American Library Ass’n v. Pataki</em>, 969 F. Supp. 160
  (S.D.N.Y. 1997) (invalidating a New York statute).</p>

  <p>In the current environment of rapidly developing and
  integrating media technology, the once discrete worlds of print,
  visual and electronic media are discrete no longer. <em>Amici</em>
  once devoted exclusively to the publication of books and
  magazines, and production of films are now or soon will be making
  some of those same materials available online via
  Internet-capable personal computers and Internet-ready television
  sets.</p>

  <p><em>Amici</em> draw no comfort from the proposed narrowings with
  regard to the requisite knowledge and other elements suggested by
  the State. Faced with potential criminal penalties for guessing
  wrong as to what a local federal prosecutor might believe is
  "harmful to minors" in a given community, <em>amici</em> engaged in
  providing speech for adults will be faced with the
  constitutionally impermissible dilemma of risking prosecution or
  engaging in self-censorship.</p>

  <p>Under such a regime, frank and provocative discussions,
  whether generated by "affairs of the state," public health issues
  such as AIDS and abortion, readings from and critiques of
  classical and modern fiction, reviews of sound recordings and
  motion pictures, reader, viewer and listener reactions to
  literary, music, and television fare dealing in some manner with
  the topic of sex or sexual relationships, to name a few, may well
  fall in the category of speech that is viewed as too risky and
  thus could be forsaken for other, "safer" speech. The necessary
  effect of the Michigan act will thus be to force speakers to
  "steer far wider of the unlawful zone." <em>Speiser v.
  Randall</em>, 357 U.S. 513 (1958).</p>

  <p>Rather than being so threatened, <em>amici</em> are
  constitutionally entitled to participate fully in the growth and
  development of the Internet. Indeed, <em>amici</em> work every day
  in myriad ways to fulfill the best vision of the Internet,
  continually searching for means of responding to the public
  interest in all manner of information and entertainment, while
  preserving the wondrously spontaneous and interactive quality of
  this medium. Through their Web sites, the varied communications
  entities whose speech interests are fostered by <em>amici</em> are
  affording the American public access to more information and
  entertainment, faster and more cheaply than ever before. The
  functions of publishers’ catalogs, magazine and newspaper kiosks,
  book and record stores, indeed, entire libraries, are captured in
  the Web site offerings of <em>amici</em>. And this is just the
  beginning.</p>

  <p>The Michigan statute at issue here threatens to impede this
  valuable development by attempting to extract from mainstream
  Internet sites all speech arguably not suitable for minors in
  derogation of the First Amendment, and imposes this
  unconstitutional standard on all sites throughout the country in
  derogation of the Commerce Clause. The court below correctly
  enjoined that attempt.</p>

  <ol type="I">
    <li><strong>The Court Below Properly Ruled That The New Provision
    Violated The First Amendment</strong></li>
  </ol>

  <p>The State concedes that the New Provision is a content-based
  regulation of speech and thus is subject to strict scrutiny.
  Brief on Appeal of Defendants-Appellants at 13 ("Br."). As such,
  the New Provision, like all content-based regulations, is
  presumptively invalid, <em>R.A.V. v. St. Paul</em>, 505 U.S. 377,
  381 (1992), and will be struck down unless the State demonstrates
  that the New Provision is necessary to further a compelling
  government interest and is narrowly tailored to achieve that
  interest. <em>Perry Educ. Ass’n v. Perry Local Educators’
  Ass’n</em>, 460 U.S. 37 (1983).</p>

  <div class="c7" type="A">
    <ol type="A">
      <li><strong>The New Provision Violates The First And Fourteenth
      Amendments Of The Constitution Because It Effectively Bans
      Speech That Is Constitutional As To Adults</strong></li>

      <li class="c4">
        <p>Because the current state of technology does not allow
        Internet speakers to exclude minors from their Internet
        communications, in any practical way, the effect of the New
        Provision is to unconstitutionally and criminally prohibit
        adults from engaging in speech constitutionally protected
        as to them but deemed harmful to minors. Thus, like similar
        statutes, it unconstitutionally infringes on First
        Amendment rights. <em>Reno I; Reno II; Johnson</em>.</p>
      </li>
    </ol>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
