<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />

  <title></title>
<style type="text/css">
/*<![CDATA[*/
 body {
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
 }
 p.c3 {font-weight: bold}
 div.c2 {font-weight: bold; text-align: center}
 div.c1 {text-align: center}
/*]]>*/
</style>
</head>

<body>
  <div class="c1">
    UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT<br />
    EASTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN<br />
    SOUTHERN DIVISION
  </div>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td width="40%">
        Cyberspace, Communications, Inc.,<br />
        Arbornet, Marty Klein, Aids Partnership<br />
        of Michigan, Art on The Net, Mark<br />
        Amerika of Alt-X, Web Del Sol, Glad<br />
        Day Bookshop, Inc., Litline, American<br />
        Civil Liberties Union,

        <blockquote>
          Plaintiffs,
        </blockquote>v.
      </td>

      <td width="20%">&nbsp;</td>

      <td width="40%">No. 99-cv-73150<br />
      Hon. Arthur J. Tarnow</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>
        John Engler, Governor of the State of<br />
        Michigan, and Jennifer M. Granholm,<br />
        Attorney General of the State of Michigan,

        <blockquote>
          Defendants.
        </blockquote>_________________________/
      </td>

      <td>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <div class="c2">
    FINDINGS OF FACT AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW<br />
    REGARDING PLAINTIFFS' MOTION FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF <a href=
    "#note1">[1]</a>
  </div>

  <p>In 1978, the Michigan Legislature enacted a statute to protect
  children by prohibiting the distribution of obscene materials to
  children of this state. 1978 Public Act 33, M.C.L. 722.671 et
  seq.; M.S.A. 25.254(1) et. seq. In an effort to modernize the
  statute in light of current technology (and in an effort to make
  other improvements in the operation of the statute), the
  Legislature amended the statute by means of 1999 Public Act 33
  (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"). The Act primarily
  attempts to do two things: 1) it adds criminal prohibitions
  against using computers or the Internet to disseminate sexually
  explicit materials to minors, and, 2) it changed the language of
  the statute so that the statute prohibits the dissemination of
  "sexually explicit" materials to minors rather than "obscene"
  materials.</p>

  <p>The Act, amendments to M.C.L. 722.671 <em>et seq.</em>, was
  signed by Defendant, John Engler, the Governor of Michigan on
  June 1, 1999. It is set to take effect August 1, 1999. Plaintiffs
  represent a broad spectrum of organizations and individuals who
  use the Internet to communicate, disseminate, display and access
  a broad range of speech and ideas. Plaintiffs include speakers,
  content providers, and/or Internet service providers (ISPs).</p>

  <p>Plaintiffs claim that the Act will adversely impact them
  because it is unconstitutionally vague or overbroad. They
  maintain it will have a chilling effect on their freedom of
  speech under the First Amendment. Plaintiffs communicate online
  both within and outside of the state of Michigan. Their speech is
  accessible within and outside of the state of Michigan. For this
  reason, Plaintiffs further argue that the Act violates the
  Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution. They have
  requested this Court issue a preliminary injunction to enjoin the
  amendments to the statute.</p>

  <p><strong>I. The Amended Statute</strong><br />
  The central prohibition contained in the amended act is found in
  M.C.L. 722.675(1); M.S.A. 25.254(5)(1):</p>

  <blockquote>
    A person is guilty of disseminating sexually explicit matter to
    a minor if that person does either of the following:

    <p>(a) Knowingly disseminates to a minor sexually explicit
    visual or verbal material that is harmful to minors;</p>

    <p>(b) Knowingly exhibits to a minor a sexually explicit
    performance that is harmful to minors.</p>
  </blockquote>The Act redefines obscenity as "sexually explicit
  matter"<a href="#note2">[2]</a> . The Act makes it unlawful to
  communicate, transmit, display, or otherwise make available by
  means of the Internet or a computer, computer program, computer
  system, or computer network this sexually explicit matter. M.C.L.
  722.673; M.S.A. 25.254(3). Violation of the statute is a felony
  punishable by up to two years in prison and a fine of $10,000.
  722.675(5); M.S.A. 25.254(5)(5)<a href="#note3">[3]</a>. Finally,
  the Act threatens criminal sanctions "if the violation
  originates, terminates, or both originates and terminates" in the
  State of Michigan. (M.C.L. 722.675(8), M.S.A. 25.254(5)(8)).

  <p>The 1999 P.A. 33 amendments were specifically intended to
  apply the pre-existing statute's prohibition on the dissemination
  of sexually explicit matter to communication over the Internet.
  Because of the anonymous and borderless nature of the Internet,
  Plaintiffs fear the amendments will subject them to criminal
  prosecution for the expression of protected speech. They filed
  suit challenging the Act. Plaintiffs then asked to enjoin the
  Act's enforcement scheduled to begin August 1, 1999.</p>

  <p>A hearing was held on the Motion for a Preliminary Injunction
  on July 22, 1999. The Court wishes to thank the parties for the
  thoroughness and quality of the arguments presented.</p>

  <p>The following constitutes the Court's findings of fact and
  conclusions of law:</p>

  <p class="c3">II. The Internet</p>

  <p>Based on the testimony presented at the hearing on the
  preliminary injunction motion, based on the parties' stipulation
  of facts, and based on the factual findings of other federal
  courts, including the United States Supreme Court,<a href=
  "#note4">[4]</a> the Court finds the following to accurately
  describe the Internet:</p>

  <p><u><strong>The Nature of the Internet</strong></u></p>

  <p>1. The Internet is a decentralized, global communications
  medium that links people, institutions, corporations and
  governments around the world. <u>ACLU</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 831;
  <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp at 164; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d
  at 1031.</p>

  <p>2. The Internet is a giant computer "network of networks"
  which interconnects innumerable smaller groups of linked computer
  networks and individual computers offering a range of digital
  information including text, images, sound and video, . <u>Reno
  I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2334; <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 164;
  <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1031; <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F.
  Supp. 2d at 481.</p>

  <p>3. While estimates are difficult due to its constant and rapid
  growth, the Internet is currently believed to connect more than
  159 countries, and over 100 million users. <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>,
  929 F. Supp. at 831; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1031. The
  amount of traffic on the Internet is doubling approximately every
  100 days.</p>

  <p>4. Content ranges from academic writings, to art, to humor, to
  literature, to medical information, to music, to news, to
  sexually oriented material. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 164;
  <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2335.</p>

  <p>5. Sexually explicit material is available on the Internet;
  however, it is not "the primary type of content on this new
  medium." <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 844; <u>Pataki</u>,
  969 F. Supp. at 164; <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 484.</p>

  <p>6. In addition, at any one time, the Internet serves as the
  communication medium for tens of thousands of global
  conversations, political debates, and social dialogues.
  <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 165-166.</p>

  <p>7. The Internet is distinguishable in important ways from
  traditional media. It is a revolutionary medium that is
  dramatically altering traditional views of communications and
  community, See <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 843-844. No
  single organization controls any membership in the Web, nor is
  there any centralized point from which individual Web sites or
  services can be blocked. <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2336;
  <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 484.</p>

  <p>8. The Internet is a global medium. <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F.
  Supp. 2d at 482. At least 40% of the content of the Internet
  originates abroad. <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2334; <u>Reno
  II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 484.</p>

  <p>9. The Internet also differs from traditional media in that it
  provides users with an ability to interact with other users and
  with content. <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 843-44. Unlike
  radio or television, communications on the Internet do not
  "invade" an individual's home or appear on one's computer screen
  unbidden. <u>Id.</u> at 844. Rather, the receipt of information
  on the Internet "requires a series of affirmative steps more
  deliberate and directed than merely turning a dial." <u>Reno
  I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2336 (<em>quoting</em> <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>,
  929 F. Supp. at 845).</p>

  <p>10. Because the Internet presents extremely low entry barriers
  to publishers and distributors of information, it is an
  especially attractive method of communicating for non-profit and
  public interest groups. <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 843;
  <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 482.</p>

  <p>11. Any person or organization with a computer connected to
  the Internet can "publish" information. <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct.
  at 2335.</p>

  <p>12. Also, unlike radio, television, newspapers and books, the
  Internet is not exclusively, or even primarily, a means of
  commercial communication. Reno v. ACLU, 929 F. Supp. at 842. In
  sum, the Internet is "a unique and wholly new medium of worldwide
  human communication." <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2334
  (<em>quoting</em> <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 844).</p>

  <p><u><strong>How Individuals Access the Internet</strong></u></p>

  <p>13. Individuals may obtain easy access to the Internet in
  particular through many educational institutions, businesses,
  libraries, and individual communities who maintain computer
  networks linked directly to the Internet and provide account
  numbers and passwords enabling users to gain access to the
  network. <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2334; <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F.
  Supp. at 164-165.</p>

  <p>14. Internet service providers ("ISPs"), such as plaintiffs
  Cyberspace Communications and Arbornet.org, offer their
  subscribers modem access to computers or networks maintained by
  the ISP which are linked directly to the Internet. <u>ACLU v.
  Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 832-33; <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at
  2334; <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 165; <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F.
  Supp. 2d at 482.</p>

  <p class="c3"><u>Ways of Communicating and Exchanging Information
  on the Internet</u></p>

  <p>15. Most users of the Internet are provided with a username,
  password and electronic mail (or "e-mail") address that allow
  them to sign on to the Internet and to communicate with other
  users. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 165.</p>

  <p>16. Many usernames are pseudonyms or pen names that often
  provide users with a distinct online identity and help to
  preserve their anonymity. An e-mail sender directs his or her
  message to a "logical rather than geographic address."
  <u>Id</u>.</p>

  <p>17. The username and e-mail address are the only indicators of
  the user's identity. Persons communicating with the user will
  know them only by their username and e-mail address (unless the
  user reveals other information about herself through her
  messages). Id. Anonymity of the communicant is both important and
  valuable to the free exchange of ideas and information on the
  Internet.</p>

  <p>18. Once an individual signs on to the Internet, there are a
  wide variety of methods for communicating and exchanging
  information with other users. <em>See generally</em> <u>Reno
  I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2334-35; <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp.
  at 834-38; <u>Shea</u>, 930 F. Supp. at 927-30; <u>Pataki</u>,
  969 F. Supp. at 165; <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 482-483.
  The primary methods are:</p>

  <dl>
    <dt><u>E-Mail:</u></dt>

    <dd>"E-mail enables an individual to send an electronic message
    - generally akin to a note or letter - to another individual or
    to a group of addresses." <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2335;
    <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 165.</dd>

    <dt><u>Online Discussion Groups:</u></dt>

    <dd>Thousands of discussion groups have been organized by
    individuals, institutions, and organizations on many different
    computer networks and cover virtually every topic imaginable --
    creating a new, global version of the village green. The three
    most common methods for online discussion are mail exploders,
    USENET newsgroups, and chat rooms.</dd>

    <dt><u>Mail Exploders:</u></dt>

    <dd>Mail exploders, also called mailing lists, allow online
    users to subscribe to automated mailing lists that disseminate
    information on particular subjects. Subscribers send an e-mail
    message to the "list," and the mail exploder automatically and
    simultaneously sends the message to all of the other
    subscribers on the list. Subscribers can reply to the message
    by sending a response to the list. <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at
    2335. Users of mailing lists typically can add or remove their
    names from the list automatically, with no direct human
    involvement. <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 834;
    <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 165-166.</dd>

    <dt><u>USENET Newsgroups:</u></dt>

    <dd>"USENET" newsgroups are a popular set of discussion groups
    arranged according to subject matter and automatically
    disseminated "using <em>ad hoc</em>, peer to peer connections
    between approximately 200,000 computers . . . around the
    world." <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2335 (<em>quoting</em>
    <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 834-35); <em>see also</em>
    <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 166. Users may read or send
    messages to most newsgroups without a prior "subscription," and
    there is no way for a speaker who posts an article to most
    newsgroups to know who is reading her message. <u>Id</u>.</dd>

    <dt><u>Chat Rooms:</u></dt>

    <dd>"Chat rooms" provide additional online discussion forums
    that allow users to engage in real time dialogue with one or
    many other users by typing messages and reading the messages
    typed by others participating in the chat, analogous to a
    telephone party line, using a computer and keyboard rather than
    a telephone. <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2335; <u>ACLU v.
    Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 835. There are thousands of different
    chat rooms available "in which collectively tens of thousands
    of users are engaging in conversations on a huge range of
    subjects." <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2335 (<em>quoting</em>
    <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 835); <u>Pataki</u>, 969
    F. Supp. at 166.</dd>

    <dt><u>The World Wide Web:</u></dt>

    <dd>The Web allows users to publish documents, also called "Web
    pages," that can then be accessed by any other user in the
    world. <em>See generally</em> <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at
    2335, and 929 F. Supp. at 836-38; <u>Shea</u>, 930 F. Supp. at
    929-30; <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 166; <u>Reno II</u>, 31
    F. Supp. 2d at 484. The Web comprises millions of separate "Web
    sites" that display content provided by particular persons or
    organizations. Any Internet user anywhere in the world with the
    proper software can create her own Web page, view Web pages
    posted by others, and then read text, look at images and video,
    and listen to sounds posted at these sites. <u>Pataki</u>, 969
    F. Supp. at 166. There are Web sites now by large corporations,
    banks, brokerage houses, newspapers and magazines, and
    government agencies and courts. <u>Id</u>.</dd>
  </dl>

  <p>19. There are a number of different ways that Internet users
  can browse or search for content on the Web: by specific address
  ("URL") or by "search engines," which are available free of
  charge to help users navigate the Web, <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct.
  at 2335; <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 166; or by "linking" from
  one Web page to another. <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 483.
  Almost all Web documents contain "links," which are short
  sections of text or image that refer and link to another Web
  document. <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2335; <u>Pataki</u>, 969
  F. Supp. at 166-167; <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 484. When
  selected by the user, the "linked" document is automatically
  displayed, wherever in the world it is actually stored. <u>Reno
  I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2335; <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 166;
  <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 484. "The Web is thus
  comparable . . . to both a vast library including millions of
  readily available and indexed publications and a sprawling mall
  offering goods and services." <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at
  2335.</p>

  <p>20. "Taken together, these tools constitute a unique medium -
  known to its users as `cyberspace' - located in no particular
  geographical location but available to anyone, anywhere in the
  world, with access to the Internet." <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at
  2334-35.</p>

  <p>21. Once a provider posts content on the Internet, it is
  available to most other Internet users worldwide. <u>ACLU v.
  Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 844; <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at
  167; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1032.</p>

  <p>22. For the vast majority of communications over the Internet,
  including all communications over the Web, by e-mail, newsgroups,
  mail exploders, and chat rooms, it is not technologically
  possible for a speaker to determine the age of a user who is
  accessing such communications. See <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at
  2336-37 (<em>quoting</em> <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at
  845) ("There is no effective way to determine the identity or the
  age of a user who is accessing material through e-mail, mail
  exploders, newsgroups, or chat rooms."); <u>Shea</u>, 930 F.
  Supp. at 941 ("for the vast majority of applications and services
  available on the Internet, a user has no way of communicating . .
  . with certainty that the content will not reach a person under
  eighteen . . . ."); <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 495 ("the
  nature of the Web and the Internet is such that Web site
  operators and content providers cannot know who is accessing
  their sites, or from where, or how old the users are, unless they
  take affirmative steps to gather information from the user, and
  the user is willing to give them truthful responses.").</p>

  <p>Thus, these categories of speakers either must make their
  information available to all users of the Internet, including
  users who may be minors, or not make it available at all. This is
  also true for non-Web-based communications by e-mail, newsgroups,
  mail exploders, and chat rooms.</p>

  <p>For Web speakers, the vast majority cannot now determine the
  age of people accessing their speech and many could not
  technologically change their site even to request information on
  age. Also, even for those Web sites, or other Internet speakers,
  who ask readers to state their age, there is no reasonable method
  by which the speaker can determine the reliability of that
  information.</p>

  <p class="c3"><u>The Availability of User-Based Filtering
  Programs</u></p>

  <p>24. There are a variety of options available to parents and
  other users who wish to restrict access to online communications
  that they might consider unsuitable for minors. <em>See
  generally</em> <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2337, and <u>ACLU v.
  Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 838-42; <u>Shea</u>, 930 F. Supp. at
  931-34.</p>

  <p>25. First, there are a variety of user-based software products
  that allow users to block access to sexually explicit materials
  on the Web, to prevent minors from giving personal information to
  strangers by e-mail or in chat rooms, and to keep a log of all
  online activity that occurs on the home computer. <u>Reno I</u>,
  117 S. Ct. at 2337. "The market for this type of [user-based]
  software is growing, and there is increasing competition among
  software providers to provide products." <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929
  F. Supp. at 839.</p>

  <p>26. Second, large commercial online services such as America
  Online provide features to prevent minors from accessing chat
  rooms and to block access to certain newsgroups based on
  keywords, subject matter, or specific newsgroup. <u>Reno I</u>,
  117 S. Ct. at 2336; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1033;
  <u>Reno II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 492.</p>

  <p>27. Third, the large online services such as America Online
  also offer parental control options free of charge to their
  members. America Online has established an online area designed
  specifically for children. The "Kids Only" parental control
  feature allows parents to establish an America Online account for
  their children that accesses only the "Kids Only" channel on
  America Online. ACLU v. Reno, 929 F. Supp. at 842.</p>

  <p class="c3"><u>The Interstate Nature of Online
  Communication</u></p>

  <p>28. The Internet is wholly insensitive to geographic
  distinctions, and Internet protocols were designed to ignore
  rather than document geographic location. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F.
  Supp. at 167, 170; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1032.</p>

  <p>29. While computers on the network do have "addresses," they
  are digital addresses on the network rather than geographic
  addresses in real space. The majority of Internet addresses
  contain no geographic indicators. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at
  170.</p>

  <p>30. Like the nation's railways and highways, the Internet is
  by nature an instrument of interstate commerce. <u>Pataki</u>,
  969 F. Supp. at 173; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1032. Just
  as goods and services travel over state borders by truck and
  train, information flows freely across state borders on the
  Internet. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 173.</p>

  <p>31. It is this characteristic which has earned the Internet
  the nickname, "the information superhighway." <u>Pataki</u>, 969
  F. Supp. at 161.</p>

  <p>32. In fact, no aspect of the Internet can feasiblely be
  closed to users from another state. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp.
  at 171; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1032. There is no way to
  stop or bar speech at Michigan's border.</p>

  <p>33. An Internet user who posts a Web page cannot prevent
  Michiganians or Oklahomans or Iowans from accessing that page.
  They will not even know the state residency of any visitors to
  that site, unless the information is voluntarily (and accurately)
  given by the visitor. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 171; <u>Reno
  II</u>, 31 F. Supp. 2d at 495; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at
  1032.</p>

  <p>34. Participants in chat rooms and online discussion groups
  also have no way of knowing when participants from a particular
  state have joined the conversation. <u>Id</u>; <u>Johnson</u>, 4
  F. Supp. 2d at 1032.</p>

  <p>35. Because most e-mail accounts allow users to download their
  mail from anywhere, it is impossible for someone who sends an
  e-mail to know with certainty where the recipient is located
  geographically. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 171.</p>

  <p>36. In addition, the Internet is a redundant series of linked
  computers over which information often travels randomly.
  <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 164, 171. Thus, a message from an
  Internet user sitting at a computer in New York may travel via
  one or more other states - including Michigan - before reaching a
  recipient who is also sitting at a computer in New York.
  <u>Id</u>; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1032.</p>

  <p>37. There is no way for an Internet user to prevent his or her
  message from reaching residents of any particular state.
  <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 171; <u>Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d
  at 1032. Similarly, "[o]nce a provider posts its content on the
  Internet, it cannot prevent that content from entering any
  community." <u>Reno I</u>, 117 S. Ct. at 2336 (<em>quoting</em>
  <u>ACLU v. Reno</u>, 929 F. Supp. at 844).</p>

  <p class="c3">III. Standing</p>

  <p>Defendants argue that the threshold issue before the court is
  that the Plaintiffs lack standing to bring this request for
  injunctive relief. A plaintiff must have standing to bring or
  pursue a claim in federal court. <u>Arizonans for Official
  English v Arizona,</u> 520 U.S. 43, 117 S.Ct. 1055, 137 L.Ed.2d
  170 (1997). Standing is a question of judicial power, and it is
  the threshold question in every federal case. <u>Warth v
  Seldin</u>, 422 U.S. 490, 95 S. Ct. 2205, 45 L.Ed.2d 343 (1975).
  Standing encompasses at least three factors:</p>

  <ol>
    <li>an injury in fact - i.e., an injury which is concrete and
    actual or imminent, not merely speculative or
    hypothetical;</li>

    <li>a causal relationship between the injury and the challenged
    conduct; and</li>

    <li>a likelihood that the injury will be redressed by a
    favorable decision.</li>
  </ol><u>Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife</u>, 504 U.S. 555, 112
  S.Ct. 2130, L.Ed.2d 351 (1992). "Although `imminence' is
  concededly a somewhat elastic concept, it cannot be stretched
  beyond its purpose, which is to ensure that the alleged injury is
  not too speculative for Article III purposes - that the injury is
  `certainly impending'." <u>Id</u>. at 564, n.2, 112 S.Ct. at
  2138, n. 2. (Emphasis in original).

  <p>Defendants claim that to address these issues raised by
  plaintiffs is to issue an advisory opinion because the statute is
  yet to go into effect and Plaintiffs have not yet been injured in
  fact.<a href="#note5">[5]</a></p>

  <p>Under the criteria outlined by the Supreme Court in
  <u>Lujan</u>, the plaintiffs have standing, because an alleged
  injury is `<em>certainly</em> impending', if the statute takes
  effect and the material they disseminate is deemed "sexually
  explicit". No one should have to go through being arrested for a
  felony, publically shamed, and pay for a defense only to have a
  court find that the newly enacted statute is unconstitutional.
  This can, and should, be determined before such injury occurs.
  Such a challenge can be brought by those that may be accused, or
  injured in fact, by such a statute.</p>

  <p class="c3">Plaintiffs include:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>Cyberspace Communications ("Cyberspace") is a tax exempt
    Michigan non-profit corporation. Cyberspace maintains a free
    public access Internet service called "Grex," at the Internet
    address: <a href=
    "http://www.cyberspace.org">Cyberspace.org</a>. Currently
    approximately 29,000 users access Grex through the World Wide
    Web or through a bank of dial-in modems located in Ann Arbor,
    Michigan.</li>

    <li>Arbornet is a tax-exempt Michigan non-profit corporation.
    Arbornet runs M-Net, "America's first public access Unix
    system." M-Net began operations on June 16, 1983. Arbornet's
    users obtain services such as conferences, e-mail, chat, and
    Internet access, generally at no cost.</li>

    <li>Marty Klein is a licensed Marriage and Family Therapist in
    Palo Alto, California. In addition to his practice as a
    therapist working with individuals and couples, Dr. Klein is
    also the author of numerous books and articles about human
    sexuality. Dr. Klein has maintained a Web site, located at
    <a href="http://www.sexed.org">www.Sexed.org</a>.</li>

    <li>Aids Partnership of Michigan ("Aids Partnership") maintains
    a Web site, at the address <a href=
    "http://www.aidspartnership.org">www.aidspartnership.org</a>,
    which contains information regarding HIV and Aids, including
    the most recent scientifically available facts about the
    methods of transmitting HIV and testing for HIV and Aids, and
    methods of safer sex practices.</li>

    <li>Art on the Net is a non-profit organization with an
    international artist site ("art.net") on the Web. Art on the
    Net assists over 125 artists from all over the world in
    maintaining online studios.</li>

    <li>Mark Amerika is a critically acclaimed writer and publisher
    of Alt-X, a Web site containing original literary works
    published only online, reviews of new media art and theory,
    original online art projects. Alt-X has been called "the
    literary publishing model of the future."</li>

    <li>Web Del Sol is a voluntary association which functions as a
    dynamic, literary arts complex on the Internet. Its Web address
    is <a href="http://www.webdelsol.com">www.webdelsol.com</a>.
    Web Del Sol was founded as a forum for the collaborative
    literary efforts of dozens of editors and writers, and hosts a
    vast array of poems, articles, essays, and photography, as well
    as a bulletin board and a chat room.</li>

    <li>Glad Day Bookshop is a bookstore located in Boston,
    Massachusetts, that specializes in gay and lesbian books and
    also maintains a Web site on which visitors may obtain
    information about Glad Day Bookshop and the books it makes
    available. Its Web site is located at <a href=
    "http://www.tiac.net/users/gladday">www.tiac.net/users/gladday</a>.</li>

    <li>Litline a nonprofit web site set up by the Counsel for
    Literary Magazines and Presses (CLMP) to provide Internet
    content for independent literary presses, journals, and
    organizations. Its Web address is <a href=
    "http://www.litline.org">www.litline.org</a>. Litline mainly
    provides free design and hosting services to eleven independent
    literary journals and six independent presses, none of which
    could otherwise afford to go online.</li>

    <li>American Civil Liberties Union ("ACLU") is a national civil
    rights organization. The ACLU maintains a Web site on which it
    posts civil liberties information and resources, including
    material about arts censorship, obscenity laws, discrimination
    against lesbians and gays, and reproductive choice. In
    addition, the ACLU hosts unmoderated online discussion groups
    that allow citizens to discuss and debate a variety of civil
    liberties issues.</li>
  </ul>All the Plaintiffs justifiably fear prosecution. They have
  stated that they disseminate on the Internet sexually explicit
  material which arguably could be deemed "harmful to minors".
  Absent an injunction they must self-censor their speech on the
  Internet or else risk prosecution under the Act. These
  allegations of harm are sufficient to confer standing in this
  action for declaratory and injunctive relief. "In the context of
  threats to the right of free expression," it is not necessary
  "that an individual first be exposed to prosecution in order to
  have standing to challenge a statute which is claimed to deter
  the exercise of constitutional rights." <u>Briggs v. Ohio
  Elections Comm'n</u>, 61 F.3d 487, 492 (6 th Cir. 1995)
  (citations omitted). These allegations of harm also sufficiently
  support a request for a preliminary injunction. <u>G &amp; V
  Lounge, Inc. v. Michigan Liquor Control Comm'n</u>, 23 F.3d 1071,
  1078-79 (6 th Cir. 1994). <em>See</em> also <u>Dombrowski v.
  Pfister</u>, 380 U.S. 479 (1965); <u>Steffel v. Thomspon</u>, 415
  U.S. 452 (1974). The Plaintiffs in this case have standing and
  are entitled to a preliminary injunction, because the Act poses a
  threat to their rights under the U.S. Constitution. <em>See</em>
  also, <u>ACLU v. Johnson</u>, 4 F. Supp. 2d at 1027; <u>ALA v.
  Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. 160 (S.D.N.Y. 1997).

  <p class="c3">IV. First Amendment Challenge</p>

  <p>The First Amendment to the United States Constitution provides
  in pertinent part that "Congress shall make no law . . .
  abridging freedom of speech." The prohibitions of the First
  Amendment extend to the several States through the Fourteenth
  Amendment.</p>

  <p>Defendants argue <u>Ginsberg v. New York</u>, 390 U.S. 629, 88
  S.Ct. 1274, 20 L.Ed.2d 195 (1968) and <u>Miller v California</u>,
  413 U.S. 15, 93 S.Ct. 2607, 37 L.Ed. 2419 (1973), for the
  proposition that `obscenity' is not protected by the First
  Amendment. In <u>Ginsberg</u>, the Supreme Court held that a
  state could prohibit the dissemination to minors of sexually
  explicit materials which would not be legally obscene with regard
  to an adult. In <u>Miller</u>, the Supreme Court stated:</p>

  <blockquote>
    This much has been categorically settled by the Court, that
    obscene material is unprotected by the First Amendment. <u>Kois
    v. Wisconsin</u>, 408 U.S. 229, 92 S.Ct. 2245, 33 L.Ed.2d 312
    (1972); (citations omitted).

    <p>We acknowledge, however, the inherent dangers of undertaking
    to regulate any form of expression. State statutes designed to
    regulate obscene materials must be carefully limited.
    <em>See</em> <u>Interstate Circuit, Inc. v. Dallas</u>, supra,
    390 U.S., at 682--685, 88 S.Ct., at 1302--1305. As a result, we
    now confine the permissible scope of such regulation to works
    which depict or describe sexual conduct. That conduct must be
    specifically defined by the applicable state law, as written or
    authoritatively construed. A state offense must also be limited
    to works which, taken as a whole, appeal to the prurient
    interest in sex, which portray sexual conduct in a patently
    offensive way, and which, taken as a whole, do not have serious
    literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.</p>
  </blockquote><u>Id</u>. at 23-24, S.Ct. at 2614-15.

  <p>Defendants argue that the Act comports to the specifications
  of <u>Ginsberg</u> and <u>Miller</u>; therefore, the Act is
  constitutional. Yet in these cases, the `materials' referenced
  were magazines and brochures, respectively. Magazines or
  brochures can be brown bagged or hidden in the backroom of
  purveyors. With the Internet, you would have to `close the
  bookstore' because the disseminator and the recipient are not
  face to face. A magazine can be regulated or censored by the
  county in which it is located. A person's age can be verified
  because that person is physically there, and the disseminator can
  logically be held responsible for conveying "sexually explicit
  matter" to a minor. The Internet does not distinguish between
  minors and adults in their audience. To comply with the Act, a
  communicant must speak only in language suitable for children.
  Even under the guise of protecting minors, the government may not
  justify the complete suppression of constitutionally protected
  speech because to do so would "burn the house to roast the pig."
  <u>Butler v Michigan</u>, 352 U.S. 380, 383, 77 S.Ct. 524, 525, 1
  L.Ed.2d 412 (1957).</p>

  <p>The Internet is cyberspace, or an international network of
  computers. It is virtually impossible to prevent the content of
  messages from being read by someone under 18. The only way to
  ascertain an individuals age would be to require submission of a
  driver's license, birth certificate or some other form of
  identification. Considering a website may receive ten to a
  million plus "hits" a day, and many of these websites are
  established and maintained by even just one publisher; the
  impossibility of identification checking is understood. With the
  imposition of the government policing speech and deciding what is
  acceptable; a user, publisher, disseminator or communicant is
  faced with a Hobson's choice <a href="#note6">[6]</a> of shutting
  down their website (or whatever vehicle of information exchange),
  or risk prosecution for exercising protected speech.</p>

  <p>The Act itself may in fact pass constitutional muster as a
  permitted regulation of obscenity, as it is quite similarly
  worded as those statutes upheld by the Supreme Court in
  <u>Miller</u> and <u>Ginsberg</u>. Defendant argues that a state
  does have the police power to regulate obscenity within their
  borders. This is true, but proper focus centers on this Public
  Act's impact on the Internet. The Internet is an international
  free flow of ideas and information. Enforcement of this Act would
  stifle one of the cornerstones of American Society - what Thomas
  Jefferson called "The Marketplace of Ideas."</p>

  <p>The amended statute at issue limits the receipt and
  communication of information through the Internet based on the
  content of that information. A content-based limitation on speech
  will be upheld only where the state demonstrates that the
  limitation "is necessary to serve a compelling state interest and
  that it is narrowly drawn to achieve that end." <u>Perry Educ.
  Ass'n. v. Perry Local Educators' Ass'n</u>, 460 U.S. 37, 45, 103
  S.Ct. 948, 74 L.Ed.2d 794 (1983) (<em>citing</em> <u>Carey v.
  Brown</u>, 447 U.S. 455, 461, 100 S.Ct. 2286, 65 L.Ed.2d 263
  (1980)).</p>

  <p>This test involves three distinct inquiries:<a href=
  "#note7">[7]</a> (1) whether the interests asserted by the state
  are compelling; (2) whether the limitation is necessary to
  further those interests; and (3) whether the limitation is
  narrowly drawn to achieve those interests. <u>Mainstream Loudoun
  v Board of Trustees of Loudoun County Library</u>, 24 F.Supp.2d
  552, 564-65 (E.D. Va. 1998).</p>

  <p class="c3">(1). Whether the Defendant's Interests Are
  Compelling</p>

  <blockquote>
    The Internet offers users quick and relatively simple access to
    a wide variety of information resources, products and services,
    and opportunities for interactive communication with millions
    of people through the use of a computer. . . . Despite the
    beneficial and education advantages of the Internet's growing
    network of information, the Internet is not without its
    problems. One common concern, particularly in light of the
    number of children who use the Internet, is the relative ease
    with which children can access materials that their parents
    might find offensive.
  </blockquote><u>House Legislative Analysis</u>, Senate Bill 117
  (March 18, 1999)

  <p>The Court is quite sympathetic to the attempt of the Michigan
  legislature to protect minors. Society has a compelling interest
  in preserving the innocence of their children. Although
  Defendants have failed to address this prong, there is arguably a
  compelling state interest to shelter our children from sexually
  explicit material until maturity. The Supreme Court has
  recognized such an interest: "We have recognized that there is a
  compelling interest in protecting the physical and psychological
  well-being of minors. This interest extends to shielding minors
  from the influence of literature that is not obscene by adult
  standards." <u>Sable Communications of California, Inc. v
  FCC</u>, 492 U.S. 115, 126, 109 S.Ct. 2829, 2836, 106 L.Ed.2d 93
  (1989), <em>quoting</em> <u>Ginsberg v. New York</u>, 390 U.S.
  629, 639-640, 88 S.Ct. 1274, 1280-81, 20 L.Ed.2d 195 (1968); and
  <u>New York v. Ferber</u>, 458 U.S. 747, 756-757, 102 S.Ct. 3348,
  3354-55, 73 L.Ed.2d 1113 (1982).</p>

  <p class="c3">(2) Whether the Act is Necessary to Further Those
  Interests</p>

  <p>To satisfy strict scrutiny, defendants must do more than
  demonstrate that it has a compelling interest; they must also
  demonstrate that the Act is necessary to further that interest.
  Defendants "must demonstrate that the recited harms are real, not
  merely conjectural, and that the regulation will in fact
  alleviate these harms in a direct and material way." <u>Turner
  Broadcasting Systems, Inc. v. FCC</u>, 512 U.S. 622, 664, 114
  S.Ct. 2445, 129 L.Ed.2d 497 (1994); <em>see</em> also
  <u>Johnson</u>, 865 F.Supp. at 1439 ("[S]imply alleging the need
  to avoid sexual harassment is not enough [;] ... the defendant[ ]
  must show that the threat of disruption is actual, material, and
  substantial."). The defendant bears this burden because "[t]he
  interest in encouraging freedom of expression in a democratic
  society outweighs any theoretical but unproven benefit of
  censorship." <u>Reno v. ACLU</u>, 521 U.S. 844, 117 S.Ct. 2329,
  2351, 138 L.Ed.2d 874 (1997).</p>

  <p>The Defendants failed to satisfy that the Act will further a
  compelling interest of the State. Plaintiffs though did submit
  testimony and documentation that such an Act could produce a
  result contrary to the desires of society. The free flow of
  information on the Internet enables a teenager to ask about
  premarital sex or sexually transmitted diseases with anonymity.
  Plaintiffs at the hearing read into the record an example of a
  teenager asking Dr. Marty Klein, a sex therapist in California
  and plaintiff in this case, who operates a website entitled "Ask
  Me Anything", about an encounter with her boyfriend that she
  incorrectly reasoned was not sexual intercourse. Other examples
  offered at the hearing include submitted transcripts of chat room
  discussions concerning contraceptives and abstention. Sometimes
  words were utilized in these discussions which could be construed
  as "sexually explicit" and "harmful to a minor", which
  theoretically could subject the disseminator to criminal
  prosecution.</p>

  <p>This would have an adverse affect on public policy. With all
  Internet participants fearful of criminal prosecution if certain
  terminology is utilized, the discussions would be stifled to the
  point that a teenager seeking answers to curious questions
  concerning a subject foremost on their mind, could not find
  answers via this medium. Without open discussion of how to
  prevent being raped or birth control or abstention, there would
  quite possibly be greater numbers of teenage pregnancy or
  sexually transmitted diseases. This would be contrary to the
  interests of the State.</p>

  <p class="c3">(3) Whether the Act Is Narrowly Tailored to Achieve
  the Compelling Government Interests.</p>

  <p>Even if defendants could demonstrate that the Act was
  reasonably necessary to further compelling state interests, it
  would still have to show that the Act is narrowly tailored to
  achieve those interests. The government may effectuate even a
  compelling interest only "by narrowly drawn regulations designed
  to serve those interests without unnecessarily interfering with
  First Amendment freedoms." <u>Sable</u>, 492 U.S. at 126, 109
  S.Ct. at 2836. The government must "choose[s] the least
  restrictive means to further the articulated interest."
  <u>Id</u>.</p>

  <p class="c3"><u>Whether Less Restrictive Means Are
  Available</u></p>

  <p>In <u>Sable</u>, the Court declared unconstitutional a statute
  banning all "indecent" commercial telephone communications. The
  Court found that the government could not justify a total ban on
  communication that is harmful to minors, but not obscene, by
  arguing that only a total ban could completely prevent children
  from accessing indecent messages. <u>Id</u>. at 128, 109 S.Ct.
  2829. The Court held that without evidence that less restrictive
  means had "been tested over time," the government had not carried
  its burden of proving that they would not be sufficiently
  effective. <u>Id</u>. at 128-29, 109 S.Ct. 2829.</p>

  <p>Testimony was offered by Plaintiffs through a qualified
  Internet expert. Dr. Lorrie Faith Cranor is Senior Technical
  Staff Member for Secure Systems Research for AT&amp;T
  Labs-Research in Florham Park, New Jersey. She testified at the
  hearing that there are many less intrusive, more effective ways
  to screen harmful material to minors. Some of the ways or methods
  that this can be accomplished is through the use of currently
  marketed software that restrict content received. This safe and
  child-friendly software works off of either a `white list' or a
  `black list' theory. A white list enables a parent to program
  what areas of the Internet their child will be allowed to enter.
  A black list prevents a child from venturing into certain
  pre-programed areas. Dr. Cranor explained that there is software
  available to allow parents to filter certain words that may be
  offensive. Some of these are smart programs that read the context
  in which the word is presented, e.g. differentiating between a
  woman's thigh and a chicken thigh. All of these software programs
  have settings that allow a parent to expand vocabulary words as a
  child matures. These programs are reasonably priced, usually
  between $20 to $30.</p>

  <p>Many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) allow parents to
  regulate content with different levels of restriction. The ISP
  allows parents to establish separate accounts for their children
  depending on their ages restricting entry to only child-friendly,
  fun and educational places on the Internet. These areas are
  usually monitored by employees of the ISP and a communicant that
  shares offensive language will be blocked when discovered.</p>

  <p>It was also noted at the hearing that Internet users have an
  unwritten code of decency and curiosity. If a communicant is
  being offensive to other chat room participants, (s)he will be
  told to stop. If the communicant persists, the offensive
  communicant will be `flamed' by the group. A flame is a
  continuous barrage of warnings from others. The warnings can be
  so continuous and overwhelming that flaming can render the
  black-listed recipient's computer unusable online <a href=
  "#note8">[8]</a> .</p>

  <p>Dr. Cranor began her list of available methods or ways for
  which a parent can monitor the content of material to which a
  child receives, as having a parent sit down and explore with the
  child. Parental control is the most effective method in
  overseeing where the child ventures. This can be as simple as
  placing the computer in a common area of your home, like the
  living room, so the child can anticipate the presence of an
  adult. She suggested not placing the computer in the children's
  bedroom where they have the seclusion for unbounded exploration.
  A parent could also place a lock on the computer until such time
  as a parent can supervise the child. If the parent cannot
  directly supervise the child's computer usage, then set limits,
  much like what shows a child can and cannot watch on television.
  There are software programs that log all the websites so that a
  parent can have a record and the child knows that they have to
  adhere to limits. Finally, the Court takes judicial notice of the
  fact that every computer is equipped with an on/off switch.</p>

  <p>The Court finds that the Act is not narrowly tailored, because
  less restrictive means are available to further Defendants'
  interests. As in <u>Sable</u>, there is no evidence that
  Defendants has tested any of these means over time.</p>

  <p>In summary, Defendants have asserted a broad right to censor
  the expressive activity of the receipt and communication of
  information through the Internet with an Act that (1) addresses a
  compelling government interest but is not necessary to further
  that interest ; (2) is not narrowly tailored; and, (3) fails to
  employ the least restrictive means available to further that
  interest. The Act offends the guarantee of free speech in the
  First Amendment and is, therefore, unconstitutional.</p>

  <p><u><strong>V. Violation of the Commerce Clause</strong></u></p>

  <p>The Commerce Clause, U.S. Const. Art. I, Sec. 8, cl. 3,
  contains an express authorization for Congress to "regulate
  Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States ...".
  A "dormant" or "negative" aspect of this grant of power is that a
  state's power to impinge on interstate commerce may be limited in
  some situations. <u>Quill Corp. v. North Dakota</u>, 504 U.S.
  298, 112 S.Ct. 1904, 119 L.Ed.2d 91 (1992).</p>

  <p>Defendants do not dispute that the Act reaches interstate
  commerce. Rather, they contend that the Act does not discriminate
  against out-of-state businesses in favor of Michigan businesses.
  Further, the government argues, any balancing of burdens on
  interstate commerce with local interests must tip in favor of the
  local interests asserted in the Act. These contentions fail for
  the reasons explained in <u>ACLU v. Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. 160
  (S.D.N.Y. 1997).</p>

  <p>First, Defendants focus solely on the line of cases which
  prohibit a state's discrimination against out-of-state
  businesses. The Commerce Clause reaches further than such
  discrimination alone. The Commerce Clause also operates to
  preclude "the application of a state statute to commerce that
  takes place wholly outside the State's borders, whether or not
  the commerce has effects within the state." <u>Pataki</u>, 160 F.
  Supp. at 175 (<em>quoting</em> <u>Healy v. The Beer
  Institute</u>, 491 U.S. 324, 336 (1989)). Although the Act by its
  terms regulates speech that "originates" or "terminates" in
  Michigan, virtually all Internet speech is, as stipulated by
  Defendants available everywhere including Michigan. A New York
  speaker must comply with the Act in order to avoid the risk of
  prosecution in Michigan even though (s)he does not intend his
  message to be read in Michigan. A publisher of a web page cannot
  limit the viewing of his site to everyone in the country except
  for those in Michigan. The Internet has no geographic boundaries.
  The Act is, as a direct regulation of interstate commerce, a
  <em>per se</em> violation of the Commerce Clause.</p>

  <p>Moreover, even if this Court reaches the balancing of burdens
  on interstate commerce with local interests asserted in the Act,
  the Commerce Clause still requires the injunction of this Act.
  Assuming <em>arguendo</em> the validity of Michigan's interest in
  the Act, the Act will be wholly ineffective in achieving the
  asserted goal because nearly half of all Internet communications
  originate overseas. <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 177. Just as
  in <u>Martin-Marietta Corp. v. Bendix Corp.</u>, 690 F.2d 558,
  566 (6 th Cir. 1982), where the Sixth Circuit said: "[W]hile
  protecting local investors is plainly a legitimate state
  objective, the state has <em>no</em> legitimate interest in
  protecting non-resident shareholders"; so to Michigan has no
  interest in regulating out-of-state communications.</p>

  <p>As further explained in <u>Pataki</u>, the chilling effect on
  Internet communications outside of Michigan greatly outweighs any
  putative benefit inside Michigan. The Act, and other state
  statutes like it, would subject the Internet to inconsistent
  regulations across the nation. Information is a commodity and
  must flow freely. On this basis alone, the Act may be
  preliminarily enjoined as a violation of the Commerce Clause.</p>

  <p class="c3">VI. Fundamental Right of Child Rearing</p>

  <p>Although Plaintiffs did not raise the argument that parents
  have a liberty interest in how their own children are
  raised<a href="#note9">[9]</a>, nor is the Court's decision today
  based on that sound principal, the Court believes that there is a
  good argument to be considered.</p>

  <p>As Mr. Justice Harlan wrote, dissenting in <u>Poe v.
  Ullman</u>, 367 U.S. 497, 551-552, 81 S.Ct. 1752, 1781, 6 L.Ed.2d
  989 (1961):</p>

  <blockquote>
    (H)ere we have not an intrusion into the home so much as on the
    life which characteristically has its place in the home. . . .
    The home derives its pre-eminence as the seat of family life.
    And the integrity of that life is something so fundamental that
    it has been found to draw to its protection the principles of
    more than one explicitly granted Constitutional right.

    <div class="c1">
      * * * *
    </div>. . . (T)he full scope of the liberty guaranteed by the
    Due Process Clause cannot be found in or limited by the precise
    terms of the specific guarantees elsewhere provided in the
    Constitution. This 'liberty' is not a series of isolated points
    pricked out in terms of the taking of property; the freedom of
    speech, press, and religion; the right to keep and bear arms;
    the freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures; and so on.
    It is a rational continuum which, broadly speaking, includes a
    freedom from all substantial arbitrary impositions and
    purposeless restraints, . . . and which also recognizes, what a
    reasonable and sensitive judgment must, that certain interests
    require particularly careful scrutiny of the state needs
    asserted to justify their abridgment.
  </blockquote><u>Id</u>. at 542-543, 81 S.Ct., at 1776-1777.

  <p>Further, the Supreme Court explained in <u>Moore v City of
  Cleveland, Ohio</u>, 431 U.S. 494, 97 S. Ct. 1932, 52 L.Ed.2d 531
  (1977):</p>

  <blockquote>
    But unless we close our eyes to the basic reasons why certain
    rights associated with the family have been accorded shelter
    under the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause, we cannot
    avoid applying the force and rationale of these precedents to
    the family choice involved in this case.
  </blockquote><u>Id</u>. at 502, S.Ct. at 1936.

  <blockquote>
    <div class="c1">
      * * * *
    </div>Our decisions establish that the Constitution protects
    the sanctity of the family precisely because the institution of
    the family is deeply rooted in this Nation's history and
    tradition. [footnote omitted]. It is through the family that we
    inculcate and pass down many of our most cherished values,
    moral and cultural.
  </blockquote><u>Id</u>. at 503-504, S.Ct. at 1938.

  <p>Although it is difficult in today's society to constantly
  monitor the activities of children, it is still the right, and
  duty, of every parent to teach and mold children's concepts of
  good and bad, right and wrong. This right is no greater than in
  the confines of ones own home. A family with values will
  supervise their children. This includes setting limits, and
  either being there to enforce those limits, or utilizing the
  available technology to do so. With such less restrictive means
  to monitor the online activities of children, the government need
  not restrict the right of free speech guaranteed to adults.</p>

  <p class="c3">VII. Preliminary Injunction Standard</p>

  <p>The district courts must consider the following four factors
  in determining whether or not to issue a preliminary
  injunction:</p>

  <ol>
    <li>whether the movant has a "strong" likelihood of success on
    the merits;</li>

    <li>whether the movant would otherwise suffer irreparable
    injury;</li>

    <li>whether issuance of a preliminary injunction would cause
    substantial harm to others; and</li>

    <li>whether the public interest would be served by issuance of
    a preliminary injunction.</li>
  </ol><u>McPherson v. Michigan High Sch. Athletic Ass'n, Inc.</u>,
  119 F.3d 453, 459 (6th Cir.1997) (en banc) (<em>quoting</em>
  <u>Sandison v. Michigan High Sch. Athletic Ass'n, Inc.</u>, 64
  F.3d 1026, 1030 (6th Cir.1995)). These factors are not
  prerequisites to issuing an injunction but factors to be
  balanced. <u>United Food &amp; Commercial Workers Union Local
  1099 v Southwest Ohio Regional Transit Auth.</u>, 163 F3d 341,
  347 (6 th Cir. 1998).

  <p>"The purpose of a preliminary injunction is always to prevent
  irreparable injury so as to preserve the court's ability to
  render a meaningful decision on the merits." <u>Stenberg v.
  Cheker Oil Co.</u>, 573 F.2d 921, 925 (6th Cir.1978);
  <em>See</em> also <u>Canal Authority of State of Florida v.
  Callaway</u>, 489 F.2d 567, 576 (5th Cir.1974) (same).
  Recognizing that preservation of the court's ability to exercise
  meaningful review may require affirmative relief in order to
  prevent some future irreparable injury. <em>See</em>, e.g., 11A
  Charles A. Wright, Arthur R. Miller, and Mary K. Kane, <u>Federal
  Practice and Procedure</u> Sec. 2948 (1995).</p>

  <p class="c3">VIII. Applying the Standard</p>

  <p>1. The Court concludes that Plaintiffs are likely to succeed
  on their claims that:</p>

  <blockquote>
    (a) The Act, on its face and as applied to Plaintiffs, violates
    the First and Fourteenth Amendments, and the Commerce Clause of
    the United States Constitution.

    <p>(b) The Act violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments of
    the United States Constitution because it effectively bans
    speech that is constitutionally protected for adults.</p>

    <p>(c) Defendants have failed to satisfy their burden to
    demonstrate that the Act will directly and materially advance a
    compelling governmental interest.</p>

    <p>(d) Defendants have failed to demonstrate that the Act
    constitutes the least restrictive means of serving its stated
    interest.</p>

    <p>(e) The Act violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments of
    the United States Constitution because it is substantially
    overbroad.</p>

    <p>(f) The Act violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments of
    the United States Constitution because it prevents people from
    communicating and accessing information anonymously. (g) The
    exceptions set forth in the Act fail to ameliorate the above
    constitutional violations. <em>See generally</em> <u>Reno</u>,
    117 S. Ct. 2329; <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. 160.</p>

    <p>(h) The Act violates the Commerce Clause of the United
    States Constitution because it regulates conduct occurring
    wholly outside the State of Michigan.</p>

    <p>(i) The Act violates the Commerce Clause of the United
    States Constitution because it constitutes an unreasonable and
    undue burden on interstate and foreign commerce. See e.g.
    <u>Pataki</u>, 969 F. Supp. at 177-80 (noting that nature of
    the Internet makes the burdens on interstate and foreign
    commerce unreasonable in light of the limited benefits
    conferred locally); ACLU v. <u>Johnson</u>, <em>supra</em>.</p>

    <p>(j) The Act violates the Commerce Clause of the United
    States Constitution because it subjects interstate use of the
    Internet to inconsistent state regulations. <em>See e.g.</em>
    <u>Southern Pac. Co. v. Arizona</u>, 325 U.S. 761, 767, 65 S.
    Ct. 1515, 89 L. Ed. 1915 (1945) (finding Arizona statute
    regulating length of trains violated Commerce Clause as it
    substantially impeded the free flow of commerce between the
    states).</p>

    <p>(k) Plaintiffs have standing to bring this suit and to make
    this motion for preliminary injunction.</p>
  </blockquote>2. The Court concludes Plaintiffs have made a
  sufficient showing that they will suffer irreparable injury:

  <blockquote>
    (a) At a minimum the curtailment of their constitutionally
    protected speech, if the preliminary injunction is not granted.
    <em>See e.g.</em> <u>Elrod v. Burns</u>, 427 U.S. 347, 373, 96
    S. Ct. 2673, 49 L.Ed.2d 547 (1976) (holding that the "loss of
    First Amendment freedoms, for even minimal periods of time,
    unquestionably constitutes irreparable injury") (citing <u>New
    York Times Co. v. United States</u>, 403 U.S. 713, 91 S. Ct.
    2140, 29 L. Ed. 2d 822 (1971)).

    <p>(b) Absent an injunction, as the Act violates the Commerce
    Clause of the United States Constitution.</p>
  </blockquote>3. Finally, the Court concludes that the preliminary
  injunction will not cause substantial harm to others, but rather
  will serve the public interest, because it will protect the free
  expression of the millions of Internet users both within and
  outside of the State of Michigan.

  <p>Having reached these findings of fact and conclusions of law,
  the Court concludes that the Plaintiffs have met their burden for
  a motion for a preliminary injunction. The threatened injury to
  Plaintiffs' constitutionally protected speech outweighs any
  claimed damage to the Defendants. Consequently, the Court grants
  the Plaintiffs' Motion for a Preliminary Injunction.</p>

  <p><strong>NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT</strong>, pursuant to
  Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(d), the Defendants - as well as their
  officers, agents, servants, employees, and attorneys, and those
  persons in active concert or participation with Defendants - are
  hereby preliminarily enjoined from enforcing or threatening to
  enforce 1999 Public Act 33, which amends Sections 3, 5, 6 and 7
  (Mich. Comp. Laws Secs. 722.673, 722.675, 722.676, and 722.677)
  of 1978 Public Act 33, M.C.L. Secs. 722.671- 722.684</p>

  <blockquote>
    <u><em>&lt;signed&gt;</em></u><br />
    Arthur J. Tarnow<br />
    United States District Judge
  </blockquote>Date: <u>7/29/99</u>
  <hr />
  <strong>Footnotes</strong>

  <p><a name="note1" id="note1">[1]</a> Law Clerk Philip M.
  Cavanagh provided quality research assistance.</p>

  <p><a name="note2" id="note2">[2]</a> As defined in M.C.L.
  722.673; M.S.A. 25.254(3), as amended.</p>

  <p><a name="note3" id="note3">[3]</a> Plaintiffs here do not
  challenge the Act to the extent that it applies to obscenity.
  This would allow the Court to enjoin the amendments without
  nullifying the original statute.</p>

  <p><a name="note4" id="note4">[4]</a> As support for this Court
  to accept the parties' stipulation of facts, the parties rely on
  the following cases as cited in the stipulation: <em>Reno v.
  American Civil Liberties Union ("Reno")</em>, 521 U.S. 844, 117
  S. Ct. 2329 (1997), aff'g <em>American Civil Liberties Union
  ("ACLU") v. Reno</em>, 929 F. Supp. 824 (E.D. Pa. 1996); <em>ACLU
  v. Johnson</em>, 4 F. Supp. 2d 1029 (D. N.M. 1998), appeal
  docketed, No. 98-2199 (10 th Cir. Aug. 7, 1998); <em>American
  Libraries Ass'n v. Pataki</em>, 969 F. Supp. 160 (S.D. N.Y.
  1997); <em>ACLU v. Reno ("Reno II")</em>, 31 F. Supp. 2d 473
  (E.D. Pa. 1999), appeal docketed, No. 99-1324 (3 rd Cir. April
  26, 1999).</p>

  <p><a name="note5" id="note5">[5]</a> Defendants do not challenge
  that Plaintiffs satisfy the 2<sup>nd</sup> and 3<sup>rd</sup>
  criteria needed for standing as set forth Lujan.</p>

  <p><a name="note6" id="note6">[6]</a> Hobson's choice: [After
  Thomas Hobson (1544-1631), English liveryman, from his
  requirement that customers take either the horse nearest the
  stable door or none.] An apparently free choice that offers no
  actual alternative. Webster's II, New College Dictionary 526
  (1995)</p>

  <p><a name="note7" id="note7">[7]</a> Defendants' sole argument
  was that the State of Michigan, by its police powers, could enact
  this statute as a constitutional ban on obscenity. Therefore,
  Defendants refused to recognize that the Act regulates free
  speech and must overcome strict scrutiny.</p>

  <p><a name="note8" id="note8">[8]</a> Dr. Cranor also stated that
  she had done extensive research on solutions to crub unsolicited,
  unwanted e-mail. She labeled this junk e-mail problem as SPAM - a
  computer term which is not an acronym, but rather is named after
  a Monty Python comedy skit.</p>

  <p><a name="note9" id="note9">[9]</a> <u>Meyer v. Nebraska</u>,
  262 U.S. 390, 399, 43 S.Ct. 625, 626-627, 67 L.Ed. 1042 (1923)
  (recognizing liberty interest in raising children).</p>
</body>
</html>
