<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />

  <title>Grex's Cyberspace v. Engler Press Release</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h2>PRESS RELEASE</h2>Cyberspace Communications, Inc.<br />
  P.O. Box 4432, Ann Arbor, MI 48103<br />
  Contact: Mary Remmers (734) 665-5388<br />
  <a href=
  "mailto:mary@cyberspace.org">mary@cyberspace.org</a><br />

  <p>June 23rd, 1999, FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE</p>

  <h2>Cyberspace Communications Joins ACLU to Block Censorship
  Law</h2>

  <p>ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN -- Cyberspace Communications, Inc., an Ann
  Arbor-based non-profit corporation that operates the online
  community "Grex" (<a href=
  "http://www.cyberspace.org">www.cyberspace.org</a>), has joined a
  suit to block the implementation of Michigan Public Act 33 of
  1999 (The Child Online Protection Act), which makes it illegal to
  transmit "sexually explicit" material to minors. The Act is
  scheduled to go into effect on August 1st, 1999. Other plaintiffs
  in the suit include the American Civil Liberties Union, Art on
  the Net, Web Del Sol, and the AIDS Partnership of Michigan. The
  ACLU's press release on the suit is available <a href=
  "http://www.aclumich.org/press%20releases/internet623.htm">here</a>.</p>

  <p>Grex is an open-access online community, with a charitable
  mission and an all-volunteer staff, which hosts electronic
  discussions. It opposes the new law because the law is too broad
  (it would criminalize transmission over the Internet of many
  scenes which are shown on broadcast television), and it erodes
  the First Amendment right to free speech. It would also require
  that all discussion sites on the Internet validate the identities
  of all participants and censor any material which is visible to
  minors and of a "sexually explicit" nature. Validation and
  censorship would stifle a lot of healthy discussion, beyond what
  the law is meant to cover. And small "grass roots" organizations
  such as Grex, which cannot afford to pay validators or censors,
  would be forced to shut down.</p>

  <h3>THE LAW IS TOO BROAD</h3>

  <p>"It is an understandable desire to want to protect children
  from what some people see as unhealthy influences," said Mary
  Remmers, spokesperson for Cyberspace Communications. "We have
  existing laws about child pornography and obscenity to do that.
  This law, however, is broad enough that 'sexually explicit'
  material may include discussions of rape, AIDS, safe sex,
  pornography laws, prostitution, and other topics which people are
  entitled to discuss openly and frankly. The law encompasses even
  clinical discussions of sexual issues, not just material designed
  to shock and titillate."</p>

  <p>"It would be bad enough if this were the only material
  affected, but a law to outlaw one kind of speech inevitably
  affects other kinds. People afraid of saying the wrong thing will
  avoid getting close to a topic that might get them in trouble.
  The result is a widespread 'chilling effect' on free speech."</p>

  <h3>ENFORCING THE LAW WOULD REQUIRE VALIDATION AND
  CENSORSHIP</h3>

  <p>"In order to avoid prosecution under this act, Grex would have
  to authenticate all users and censor sexually explicit material,"
  said John Remmers, president of Cyberspace Communications. In
  cyberspace, unlike in person, it is impossible to tell who is a
  minor and who is not. To comply with the law, open-access
  discussion systems would be required to collect ID from every
  participant, and then to censor areas which are accessible to
  minors.</p>

  <p>"One of the ways Grex fosters lively debate is by encouraging
  any and all to participate and share their point-of-view," said
  Mary Remmers. "Insisting participants first register, then wait
  for an ID check, then submit their comments to moderators who
  would filter for content, would clearly limit participation and
  stifle discussion."</p>

  <p>"It's well-established legally that free speech isn't really
  free unless it can be made anonymously," said Mark Conger, a
  Cyberspace Communications board member. It is against Grex policy
  to censor content or to insist that people identify themselves.
  "We have found time and again that the best answer to speech you
  don't agree with is to rebut it, not to censor it."</p>

  <h3>VALIDATION AND CENSORSHIP ARE NOT FEASIBLE</h3>

  <p>Even if censorship were an acceptable solution, it would not
  be feasible for an organization the size of Grex. Grex is a
  "grass roots" institution run entirely by volunteers. Its 1998
  income was approximately $8200, which came almost entirely from
  donations. (The IRS has designated Cyberspace Communications a
  501(c)3 charitable institution, so donations are tax-
  deductible.) Almost all of that money goes to pay utility bills
  to keep the system running. Grex has no money to pay censors or
  validators, and yet it has 29,000 users who post about 200 long
  messages and 5000 short ones every day. It would be logistically
  impossible to get volunteers to do the work of censoring that
  material and validating the 200 people who create accounts
  daily.</p>

  <p>Putting organizations like Grex out of business has long-range
  implications for free speech. "One of the great advantages of the
  Internet is that an organization like Grex with a shoestring
  budget can be home to a community of thousands of people," said
  Mary Remmers. "If only large organizations with lots of resources
  could afford to host discussion forums, then all discussion would
  be limited by the biases and agendas of those organizations.
  Pressure from advertisers and shareholders might influence their
  censorship decisions. Under those conditions, speech is no longer
  free."</p>
  <hr />

  <p>Cyberspace Communications is a 501(c)3 charitable institution
  founded in Ann Arbor, Michigan in 1991. Its mission is to run the
  online system Grex (which means "group" in Latin) in order to
  foster free speech and community, and give Internet access to
  people who cannot afford to pay for it. Grex hosts forums on such
  topics as music, the arts, cooking, writing, consumer
  information, finance, small businesses, philosophy, living with
  disabilities, men's and women's issues, and games. Anyone with a
  computer and modem or access to the Internet can use Grex for
  free, anonymously if they wish. Funding comes almost entirely
  from donations, which are tax-deductible. Grex gets no money from
  advertising. Because Internet bandwidth is limited, users are not
  allowed to store pictures on Grex. For more information on Grex,
  visit <a href=
  "http://www.cyberspace.org">http://www.cyberspace.org</a>.</p>
</body>
</html>
