<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>E-Mail Page</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Electronic mail on Grex</h1>Once you have created your
  account on Grex, you automatically have access to full email
  services, with certain <a href=
  "emaillimits.html">limitations</a>. Your email address here on
  Grex is "userid"@cyberspace.org. Obviously you must substitute
  your own user id for the word "userid", and do not use quotes.

  <p>When sending mail to another user of Grex, you only need to
  give their user id, and may leave off the @cyberspace.org part.
  Of course if you want to receive mail from other systems, you
  must have them send the full address.</p>

  <p>There are two full-screen client programs which you can choose
  between. They are elm and pine&gt;. If you start one of these for
  the first time, it will ask you for permission to create mail
  directories. You should grant this permission.</p>

  <p>IMPORTANT WORKAROUND NOTE (Jan 2004):</p>

  <p>We are running a new version of all of our software, including
  lynx. The current lynx is missing the feature that allows you to
  run elm or pine directly by following a link. To run these
  programs you must type an exclamation point (!) and then at the
  shell prompt type elm or pine and hit enter. When you quit your
  mail program, you will be placed back at this shell promnpt, and
  you will have to type exit (and hit enter) to return to lynx.</p>

  <p>We hope to restore normal execution of elm or pine directly
  from lynx soon.</p>

  <p>Pine is very easy to learn, and is probably the best choice
  for users who are not familiar with either of these programs.</p>
</body>
</html>
