<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:srw@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>On-line Games</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>On-line Games on Grex</h1>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="lynxexec:adventure">adventure</a>, Colossal Cave
    Adventure, the first text adventure game.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:arithmetic">arithmetic</a>, a game of
    solving equations. Ctrl-C to end.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:backgammon">backgammon</a>, the board
    game. Look out for the doubling cube!</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:banner">banner</a>, creates a banner to
    print out on your printer.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:battlestar">battlestar</a>, an
    interactive science fiction text adventure.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:bj">bj</a>, the classic game of Black
    Jack. Ctrl-C to end.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:boggle">boggle</a>, the word search
    game.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:canfield">canfield</a>, a solitaire card
    game.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:ching">ching</a>, the Chinese form of
    divination. Enter your question, then hit Ctrl-D.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:craps">craps</a>, the dice game. Ctrl-C
    to end.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:cribbage">cribbage</a>, the card
    game.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:factor">factor</a>, finds the factors of
    any number you enter. Ctrl-D to end.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:fish">fish</a>, the card game of Go
    Fish.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:figlet">figlet</a>, the program to print
    your text in large ASCII fonts. Ctrl-D to quit.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:figlist%20|%20more">figlist</a>, lists
    every figlet font available on Grex.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:fortune">fortune</a>, a message from a
    cookie.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:hack">hack</a>, a dungeon adventure
    game.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:hangman">hangman</a>, the word game.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:mathom">mathom</a>, the virtual
    gift-giving program.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:mille">mille</a>, the card game Mille
    Bournes.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:monop">monop</a>, the game of
    Monopoly.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:nethack">nethack</a>, a dungeon adventure
    game.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:rain">rain</a>, which draws raindrops on
    your screen. Ctrl-C to end.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:robots">robots</a>, avoid the robots as
    long as you can. If you've played Daleks, this is the same
    thing.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:snake">snake</a>, avoid the snake while
    grabbing money. H=left, J=down, K=up, L=right, Ctrl-C to
    end.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:trek">trek</a>, the classic computer
    game. Move around the galaxy destroying Klingons.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:worm">worm</a>, move around the screen
    eating money. H=left, J=down, K=up, L=right, Ctrl-C to
    end.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:worms">worms</a>, watch the worms crawl
    around your screen.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:wump">wump</a>, Hunt the Wumpus. Search
    for the wumpus in a network of caves, avoiding obstacles.
    earch</li>
  </ul>
</body>
</html>
