<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>PicoSpan Guide</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>PicoSpan Guide</h1>This guide will help you become familiar
  with our conferencing software. Be sure to look at the "Helpful
  Concepts" if you are new to PicoSpan.

  <p><a href="lynxexec:bbs">Select this to conference</a> and type
  "quit" once or twice to return to this screen.</p>

  <p>You may read more about the following topics:</p>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="#1">Some Helpful Concepts</a></li>

    <li><a href="#2">Reading New Items</a></li>

    <li><a href="#3">Adding Your Own Response</a></li>

    <li><a href="#4">Entering a New Item</a></li>

    <li><a href="#5">Seeing What's New</a></li>

    <li><a href="#6">Finding Specific Ideas</a></li>

    <li><a href="#7">Finding Other Conferences</a></li>

    <li><a href="#8">Quit Conferencing</a></li>

    <li><a href="#9">Screening Out Discussions</a></li>

    <li><a href="#10">Getting More Information</a></li>

    <li><a href="#11">Some Useful Commands</a></li>
  </ul>
  <hr />
  <a name="1"></a>

  <h1>Some Helpful Concepts</h1>A <em>conference</em> is a group of
  people discussing multiple related topics of mutual interest over
  time.

  <p>GREX has many interesting conferences, and you can participate
  in as many of them as you like.</p>

  <p>An <em>item</em> is a specific discussion started by a GREX
  user about an idea related to the conference's main subject.</p>

  <p>A conference contains many items. After you read an item, you
  can make your own response to it if you choose. Items become a
  permanent part of the conference, and can be read at any time by
  any interested GREX user.</p>

  <p>A <em>response</em> is a comment added to the end of an item.
  Over time, an item may collect many responses.</p>

  <p>You can easily scan what's new in the discussions; review
  things you read earlier; and filter out areas of discussion that
  you don't find interesting.</p>
  <hr />
  <a name="2"></a>

  <h1>Reading New Items</h1>To read new items and responses type:

  <blockquote>
    read
  </blockquote>GREX will display the text of any new items, and new
  responses to old items.

  <p>You can modify your read request. For instance to specify only
  items and responses entered since some date, e.g., June 3, type
  the date:</p>

  <blockquote>
    scan since 6/3
  </blockquote>To look at item 22 in particular, type:

  <blockquote>
    read 22
  </blockquote>
  <hr />
  <a name="3"></a>

  <h1>Adding Your Own Response</h1>You can add your response to
  items that interest you by typing:

  <blockquote>
    respond
  </blockquote>at the <em>Respond or Pass?</em> prompt.

  <p>Start entering your text. When you are finished typing, exit
  the editor. (Use ^x for pico, the default editor.)</p>
  <hr />
  <a name="4"></a>

  <h1>Entering a New Item</h1>If you have a new topic to introduce
  for discussion,-- that is, something that isn't already under
  discussion within the current set of items--at the <em>Ok:</em>
  prompt type:

  <blockquote>
    enter
  </blockquote>
  <hr />
  <a name="5"></a>

  <h1>Seeing What's New</h1>To see the "headers" of all the items
  in your current conference, at the <em>Ok:</em> prompt type:

  <blockquote>
    scan
  </blockquote>GREX lists the header of every item in the
  conference.

  <p>To get the headers for items changed since some date, e.g.,
  June 3, use a date:</p>

  <blockquote>
    scan since 6/3
  </blockquote>To get the headers of only new items and those with
  changes, type:

  <blockquote>
    scan new
  </blockquote>
  <hr />
  <a name="6"></a>

  <h1>Finding Specific Ideas</h1>To find all the items and
  responses in a conference that mention a particular idea, e.g.,
  mentions of "communication", at the <em>Ok:</em> prompt, type:

  <blockquote>
    find "communication" all
  </blockquote>
  <hr />
  <a name="7"></a>

  <h1>Finding Other Conferences</h1>GREX has dozens of conferences.
  To find the ones that interest you, at the <em>Ok:</em> prompt,
  type:

  <blockquote>
    help conferences
  </blockquote>Once you find a conference you'd like to explore,
  you can join it. For instance, to join the co-op conference: At
  the <em>Ok:</em> prompt, type:

  <blockquote>
    join coop
  </blockquote>
  <hr />
  <a name="8"></a>

  <h1>Quitting Conferencing</h1>When you're finished conferencing
  for the time being, at the <em>Ok:</em> prompt type:

  <blockquote>
    quit
  </blockquote>
  <hr />
  <a name="9"></a>

  <h1>Screening Out Discussions</h1>To screen out an item
  concerning an uninteresting topic, at the <em>Respond or
  Pass?</em> prompt, type:

  <blockquote>
    forget
  </blockquote>The item will then be "forgotten" and you won't see
  any future activity.
  <hr />
  <a name="10"></a>

  <h1>Getting More Information</h1>For information about GREX
  commands, at any prompt type:

  <blockquote>
    help
  </blockquote>To get help with a specific command or modifier, at
  the <em>Ok:</em> prompt type:

  <blockquote>
    help <em>command</em>
  </blockquote>i.e.: help read.
  <pre>
Ok: <em>help read</em>
To read new items in a conference.
You may first want to enter:
    browse all
to get a list of items of interest
to you.  Then if you want to look at
item 22 from your list you can
enter:
    read 22
After each item, you will be
prompted to "Respond or pass?" Type:
    r
to respond, or just press [RETURN]
to pass.
 
</pre>NOTE: To save you time, the information provided on your
first request for help is limited. Watch for references to related
commands you'll want to know more about.
  <hr />
  <a name="11"></a>

  <h1>Some Useful Commands</h1>
  <pre>
    For handling items:
    read       browse     join       find
    print      respond    thaw       freeze
    check      remember   next       enter
    retire     unretire   postpone   header
 
    For handling responses:
    text       pseudonym  again      current
    pass       new        expunge    since
    first      last       kill       only
 
    For dealing with other things:
    help       write      resign
    display    echo       mail       change
    system     leave      bye
    define     undefine   quit       source
</pre>
  <hr />
  This guide to PicoSpan was prepared from the Grex Guide "Take Me
  to Your Modem" by Misti Anslin.
  <hr />
  You may <a href="mailto:carl">mail carl</a> if you have any
  questions.
</body>
</html>
