<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>PicoSpan Advanced Features</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>PicoSpan Advanced Features</h1>

  <h2>Keeping a List of Your Conferences</h2>You can keep a list of
  conferences which you want to read in a file called .cflist in
  your home directory. Use an editor to create .cflist which
  contains a list of conferences, one per line. Your .cflist might
  read:
  <pre>
        agora
        info
        coop
        cooking
        classified
        synthesis
</pre>Once you have this file, you will automatically enter the
first conference in your list whenever you start Picospan, unless
you say otherwise. From the Ok: prompt, you can use the command
"check" to see how many new items and new-reponse items are in each
of those conferences. The "next" command will take you to the next
conference with any new material in it.

  <h2>Commands to Customize Picospan</h2>There are several things
  you can set up for you Picospan sessions automatically. You need
  to use an editor to create a file in your home directory called
  .cfonce

  <p>Every time you start a Picospan session, Picospan will execute
  the commands in your .cfonce file. Here are a few commands you
  can use there:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>define pager - This lets you select the program which feeds
    the output to your terminal. You can use any of our pager
    programs, the two most popular ones are more and less. In your
    file, you can use one of:
      <pre>
        define pager more
        define pager less
        define pager "less -dE -P 'Press Spacebar for more, q to quit'"
</pre>
    </li>

    <li>define editor - This lets you select the editor you will
    use any time you enter an item or response in Picospan. You
    don't need to worry about filenames, just give the command name
    for the editor of your choice. Here are a few examples:
      <pre>
        define editor vi
        define editor bbsed
        define editor "pico -nn"
</pre>
    </li>

    <li>define shell - This tells Picospan which shell you want to
    use whenever you run a Unix command. Also, if you enter a ! by
    itself, it will give you this Unix shell. Some examples:
      <pre>
        define shell csh
        define shell bash
</pre>
    </li>

    <li>set edalways - If you have an editor defined, this tells
    Picospan to always use that editor, rather than the built-in
    editor. Just put that in your .cfonce, like so:
      <pre>
        set edalways
</pre>
    </li>

    <li>set nosource - The fairwitness of a conference may have
    defined certain commands to be run every time you enter the
    conference, such as changing the "Ok:" prompt to something
    else. If you'd rather not have this happen, put thise in your
    .cfonce :
      <pre>
        set nosource
</pre>
    </li>
  </ul>
</body>
</html>
