<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>PicoSpan Page</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>The PicoSpan Conferencing System</h1>PicoSpan conferencing
  permits conversations to proceed among the many users of Grex. If
  you have never used the system before, read the <a href=
  "pguide.html">PicoSpan Guide</a> first. There are many
  conferences on Grex, and just four of them are listed below.
  Picking any of the these links will take you into PicoSpan and
  the specified conference. Type q or quit to return to lynx.

  <ul>
    <li><a href="lynxexec:bbs%20agora">Agora</a> is the main Grex
    conference. It is the only one that is restarted regularly 4
    times a year.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:bbs%20info">Info</a> is a conference
    containing lots of information about how to use the system. You
    can also get help here.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:bbs%20coop">Coop</a> is where we discuss
    Grex and make plans for its future. It is open to members and
    non-members alike.</li>

    <li><a href="lynxexec:bbs%20aaypsi">Ann Arbor/Ypsi</a> is a
    conference for discussing matters in the local area of Ann
    Arbor, Michigan. Anyone may join, though.</li>
  </ul>There are many <a href="picospanoth.html">other
  conferences</a> and more <a href="picospanadv.html">advanced
  features</a>. If you fair-witness a conference, you might want to
  look at <a href="../local/popcorn/f-w.cheat.sheet.html">popcorn's
  f-w cheat sheet</a> to find out what you can do.
</body>
</html>
