<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
   /*<![CDATA[*/
    body {
      background-color: #FFFFFF;
    }
    div.c9 {font-size: 120%; text-align: center}
    div.c8 {font-size: 80%; text-align: center}
    p.c7 {font-size: 80%}
    span.c6 {font-size: 120%}
    span.c5 {font-size: 144%}
    *.c4 {font-size: 80%}
    td.color {background: #CCCCCC;}
    span.c3 {font-size: 172%}
    div.c2 {text-align: right}
    div.c1 {text-align: center}
   /*]]>*/
  </style>

  <title>Cyberspace Communications 501(c)3 Application</title>
<style type="text/css">
</style>
</head>

<body>
  <div class="c1">
    <h1>Cyberspace Communications 501(c)3 Application</h1>
  </div>

  <blockquote>
    <p><em>This page contains a representation of Cyberspace
    Communications Inc's application for federal 501(c)3 tax-exempt
    status. The IRS <a href="irs.xhtml">granted</a> Cyberspace
    Communications this status on July 13, 1998. Though the author
    has done his best to accurately reproduce the actual form
    submitted, this version should not be treated as
    authoritive.</em></p>

    <p><em>On the actual form, most of the narrative portions
    appear as attachments at the end of the form. In this version,
    all attachments have been inserted into the appropriate places
    in the form.</em></p>

    <p><em>The real IRS 1023 form and its instructions, as well as
    publication 557, are available from <a href=
    "http://www.irs.ustreas.gov/prod/forms_pubs/index.html">IRS
    Forms and Publications</a>.</em></p>

    <div class="c2">
      <em>- Jan Wolter<br />
      5/21/98</em>
    </div>
  </blockquote>

  <div class="c2">
    Page 1
  </div>

  <table width="100%" border="1">
    <tr>
      <td>Form <span class="c3">1023</span><br />
      (Rev. April 1996)<br />
      <span class="c4">Department of Treasury<br />
      Internal Revenue Service</span></td>

      <td align="center"><span class="c5">Application for
      Recognition of Exemption</span><br />
      <span class="c6">Under Section 501(c)3 of the Internal
      Revenue Code</span></td>

      <td>
        OMB No. 1545-0056

        <p>If exempt status is<br />
        approve, this<br />
        application will be open<br />
        for public inspection.</p>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <div class="c1">
    Read the instructions for each Part carefully.<br />
    <strong>A User Fee must be attached to this
    document</strong><br />
    If the required information and appropriate documents are not
    submitted along with Form 8718 (with payment of the appropriate
    user fee), the application may be returned to you.<br />
    <strong>Complete the Procedure Checklist on page 7 of the
    instructions</strong>
  </div>

  <table width="100%" border="1">
    <tr>
      <td colspan="3"><strong>Part I: Identification of
      Applicant</strong></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td colspan="2"><span class="c4"><strong>1a</strong> Full
      name of organization (as shown in organizating
      document)</span><br />
      Cyberspace Communications Incorporated</td>

      <td><span class="c4"><strong>2</strong> Employer
      identifcation number (EIN)</span><br />
      XX-XXXXXXX</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td colspan="2"><span class="c4"><strong>1b</strong> c/o Name
      (if applicable)</span><br />
      Jan Wolter</td>

      <td rowspan="2"><span class="c4"><strong>3</strong> Name and
      telephone number of person<br />
      to be contacted if additional information<br />
      is needed</span><br />
      Jan Wolter<br />
      (313) 995-6716</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td colspan="2"><span class="c4"><strong>1c</strong> Address
      (number and street)</span><br />
      406 West Liberty</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td colspan="2"><span class="c4"><strong>1d</strong> City or
      town, state, and ZIP code</span><br />
      Ann Arbor, MI 48103-4343</td>

      <td><span class="c4"><strong>4</strong> Month the annual
      accounting period ends</span><br />
      December</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>5</strong> Date incorporated or
      formed</span><br />
      6/21/1991</td>

      <td><span class="c4"><strong>6</strong> Activity codes (see
      page 3 of instructions.)</span><br />
      123&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;560</td>

      <td><span class="c4"><strong>7</strong> Check here if
      applying under section:<br />
      <strong>a</strong> [&nbsp;&nbsp;] 501(e)&nbsp;&nbsp;
      <strong>b</strong> [&nbsp;&nbsp;] 501(f)&nbsp;&nbsp;
      <strong>c</strong> [&nbsp;&nbsp;] 501(k)</span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <p><br /></p>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>8</strong> Did the organization
      previously apply for recognition of exemption under this Code
      section or any other section of the code?<br />
      If "Yes," attach an explanation.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>9</strong> Is the organization
      required to file Form 990 (or Form 990-EZ)?<br />
      If "No," attach an explanation (see page 3 of the Specific
      Instructions).</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>N/A</strong>&nbsp;
      [&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications has never been required to file
  form 990 because its gross annual receipts have always been well
  below $25,000.</p>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>10</strong> Has the organization
      filed Federal income tax or exempt organization information
      returns?<br />
      If "Yes," state the form numbers, years filed, and the
      Internal Revenue office where filed.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>11</strong> Check the box for the type
  of organization. ATTACH A CONFORMED COPY OF THE CORRESPONDING
  ORGANIZING DOCUMENTS TO THE APPLICATION BEFORE MAILING. (See
  <strong>Specific Instructions for Part I, Line 11,</strong> on
  page 3.) <strong>Get Pub 557, Tax-Exempt Status for Your
  Organization,</strong> for examples of organizational
  documents.)</span></p>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>a</strong></td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">[X]
      Corporation-</span></td>

      <td>
        <span class="c4">Attach a copy of the Articles of
        Incorporation (including amendments and restatements)
        showing approval by the appropriate state official; also
        include a copy of the bylaws.</span>

        <ul>
          <li><a href="articles.xhtml">Cyberspace
          Communications Articles of Incorporation</a></li>

          <li><a href="bylaws.xhtml">Cyberspace
          Communications Bylaws</a></li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>b</strong></td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">[&nbsp;] Trust-</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Attach a copy of the Trust Indenture or
      Agreement, including all appropriate signatures and
      dates.</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>c</strong></td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">[&nbsp;]
      Association-</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Attach a copy of the Articles of
      Association, Constitution, or other creating document, with a
      declaration (see instructions) or other evidence the
      organization was formed by adoption of the document by more
      than one persn; also include a copy of the
      bylaws.</span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <p><span class="c4">If the organization is a corporation or
  an unincorporated association that has not yet adopted bylaws,
  check here&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[&nbsp;]</span></p>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4">I declare under the penalties of perjury that I
  am authorized to sign this appication on behalf of the above
  organization and that I have examined this application, including
  the accompanying schedules and attachements, and that to the best
  of my knowledge it is true, correct, and complete.</span></p>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td rowspan="2"><strong>Please<br />
      Sign<br />
      Here<br /></strong></td>

      <td>Jan Wolter</td>

      <td>President</td>

      <td>4/28/98</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4">(Signature)</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">(Title or authority of
      signer)</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">(Date)</span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <div class="c2">
    Page 2
  </div>
  <hr />
  <p><strong>Part II: Activities and Operational Information</strong></p>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>1</strong> Provide a detailed narrative
  description of all the activities of the organization--past,
  present, and planned. <strong>Do not merely refer to or repeat
  the language in the organizational document.</strong> List each
  activity separately in the order of importance based on the
  relative time and other resources devoted to the activity.
  Indicate the percentage of time for each activity. Each
  description should include, as a minimum, the following:
  <strong>(a)</strong> a detailed description of the activity
  including its purpose and how each activity furthers your exempt
  purpose; <strong>(b)</strong> when the activity was or will be
  initiated; <strong>(c)</strong> where and by whom the activity
  will be conducted.</span></p>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications has activities in the following four
  areas:</p>

  <p><strong>A. Maintaining and developing Grex.</strong> The
  primary activity of Cyberspace Communications, occupying about
  95% of our organization's time, is the operation of a
  public-access computer system called "Grex" (after the Latin word
  for "group"). This computer system is currently housed in a
  rented room at [a location] in Ann Arbor and has been in
  continuous operation since June of 1991. It is operated by a
  volunteer staff under the direction of the Cyberspace
  Communications board of directors and currently has about 18,000
  registered users. Grex provides a wide range of services to the
  community that further the mission of Cyberspace
  Communications:</p>

  <ol>
    <li>A bank of dial-in modem lines in Ann Arbor (at
    734-761-3000) and an Internet connection (at
    grex.cyberspace.org) are available.

      <p>These allow people in the Ann Arbor area to easily access
      our service (through the dial-in lines), but also allows
      access by people all over the world (through the Internet
      connection). Maintaining our own direct dial-in service means
      that even people with only "obsolete" computers (readily
      available for less than $40) can easily use all our
      services.</p>
    </li>

    <li>A simple registration process enables users coming in from
    either the dial-in lines or the Internet to create Grex
    accounts for themselves. This process is designed to be as
    barrier-free as possible, encouraging the widest possible range
    of users to access our system. Users are not required to pay
    any fees, nor are they required to give any information about
    themselves. Accounts are created immediately and there is no
    delay in gaining access.

      <p>This registration process is the key to our charitable
      mission. It enables a wide variety of people who could not
      otherwise afford Internet services to use our system. We
      serve many poor people as well as other users who could not
      justify paying commercial rates for services they only use
      occasionally. People from all over the world connect over the
      Internet to access services that are prohibitively expensive
      or completely unavailable in their own countries.</p>

      <p>Our open registration policy also supports our educational
      mission. Our free and anonymous access means we have a very
      large population of young users, as well as many older users
      who want to experiment with the Internet without paying to do
      so.</p>
    </li>

    <li>We produce a variety of instructional materials, both
    printed and electronic, designed to help people learn to use
    Grex. We answer hundreds of user questions a week through
    E-mail and our on-line live help facility.

      <p>Educating users in the use of Grex is a necessary
      component of both our educational and charitable mission.</p>
    </li>

    <li>Grex hosts electronic conferences on more than 100 topics,
    all of which are open to all of our users. Typical conference
    topics include music, the arts, writing, consumer information,
    housing, finance, small business, philosophy, living with
    disabilities, men's and women's issues, parenting, pets,
    computers hardware and software, nature, cyberpunk, and role
    playing games. There are also rather non-topical "creative"
    conferences, and a general discussion area called "agora". All
    Cyberspace Communications policies are discussed and developed
    in a public conference called "coop".

      <p>These discussion forums are the key to our educational
      mission. The only direct teaching done by Cyberspace
      Communications is focused on how to use our system. Our
      broader educational mission is served by providing and
      maintaining these discussion forums where the content is
      entirely generated by the users. The wide range of users
      attracted by our open access policy ensures a wide range of
      knowledge and opinion. On-line forums are very effective in
      drawing people with diverse backgrounds into shared
      discussions.</p>

      <p>Cyberspace Communications does not attempt to limit
      discussion to "serious" topics. We believe that simply
      socializing on line can greatly aid the personal development
      of many of our young users. On-line forums can be a very
      non-threatening environment in which to learn social skills,
      up to and including those needed to democratically run a
      community service, and to gain proficiency in written
      communications.</p>
    </li>

    <li>Grex provides a range of basic Internet services, allowing
    all users to send and receive E-mail, surf the web, and publish
    their own web pages. In all cases, our service is of much lower
    quality than commercial servers, using older, non-graphical
    user interfaces and a rather slow Internet connection, but it
    is nevertheless usable.

      <p>Providing these services for free is an important part of
      our charitable mission, and helping people learn their use is
      an important part of our educational mission.</p>
    </li>

    <li>Grex runs on a sophisticated Unix system, to which all
    users are given full access. As a volunteer operation,
    Cyberspace Communications constantly works to recruit and train
    new people to help run Grex. For several people, experience
    using or running Grex has been a vital step in launching or
    advancing careers in computing.</li>

    <li>Out of necessity, Grex's staff must be very active in
    policing the system, ensuring that hostile users do not abuse
    our service to the detriment of our other users or of other
    systems on the Internet. However, we recognize that many of the
    "problem" users are, in fact, young people who need guidance to
    become good citizens of the net, so we strive to respond to
    problems in an educational rather than punitive manner. We
    believe we have had a very good success rate with this.</li>
  </ol>

  <p><strong>B. Publicizing the services offered through
  Grex.</strong> Grex is well-established and well-known and word-
  of-mouth advertising already brings us more users than we can
  easily handle, so publicity currently accounts for under 2% of
  our time. We do do some publicity focused on Ann Arbor area
  users, and we increase our publicity whenever we expand our
  resources.</p>

  <p><strong>C. Fundraising to support Grex.</strong> We are
  primarily funded by donations from our users. We have not been
  very active in seeking outside funding lest we lose the sense of
  being a "grass roots" organization, nor do we like to pressure
  our users for money very much lest we scare off people who cannot
  afford to pay. Thus our fundraising is very passive, consuming
  less than 2% of our time.</p>

  <p><strong>D. Repair and distribution of used computers.</strong>
  In the past Cyberspace Communications has coordinated the repair
  and distribution of second-hand computers to people who need them
  to access Grex and lacked the money or expertise to obtain them.
  There has been little demand for this to date, so this activity
  has accounted for less than 1% of our time.</p>

  <p>Users of Grex engage in a wide range of off-line social
  activities, but Cyberspace Communications itself has very little
  involvement in organizing or funding these activities.</p>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>2</strong> What are or will be the
  organization's sources of financial support? List in order of
  size.</span></p>

  <ol>
    <li>Membership dues.</li>

    <li>Other individual and corporate donations of money, goods,
    and services.</li>

    <li>Special fundraising events (charity auctions, etc.).</li>

    <li>Sale of promotional items (T-shirts, etc.).</li>
  </ol>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>3</strong> Describe the organization's
  fundraising program, both actual and planned and explain to what
  extent it has been put into effect. Include details of
  fundraising activities such as selective mailings, formation of
  fundraising committees, use of volunteers or professional fund
  raisers, etc. Attach representative copies of soliticitions for
  financial support.</span></p>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications is not very active in fundraising.
  It is primarily supported by voluntary donations from individual
  users. We encourage users interested in supporting Grex to become
  members. Various messages on the system encourage users to join,
  and we occasionally ask users to become members, but
  solicitations for donations are generally kept low key to avoid
  making users who cannot pay feel unwelcome. About 100 of our
  18,000 users are members.</p>

  <p>We also hold occasional on-line fundraisers to help purchase
  new equipment, and periodically we hold charity auctions where
  donated goods and services are auctioned off on-line. We also
  raise some money by selling Grex T-shirts, coffee mugs, mouse
  pads, and similar items.</p>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications has never been very active in
  seeking government or corporate funding. We have asked local
  Internet providers to donate net connectivity, and may in the
  future solicit donations of equipment and services. Though we are
  less likely to seek monetary support in the form of corporate or
  government grants, this possibility has not been excluded.</p>
  <hr />

  <div class="c2">
    Page 3
  </div>
  <hr />
  <p><strong>Part II: Activities and Operational Information</strong>
  (Continued)</p>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>3</strong> Give the following
  information about the organization's governing body:</span></p>

  <table border="1" width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td>
        <span class="c4"><strong>a</strong> Names, addresses, and
        titles of officers, directors, trustees, etc.</span>

        <p>Jan Wolter (board &amp; president) 406 W. Liberty, Ann
        Arbor, MI<br />
        Mark Conger (board &amp; treasurer) 309 W. Hoover #1, Ann
        Arbor, MI<br />
        Scott Helmke (board &amp; secretary) 1121 Bydding, Ann
        Arbor, MI<br />
        Stephen C. Gibbard (board) 1058 Island Drive Ct. #105, Ann
        Arbor, MI<br />
        Daniel Gryniewicz (board) 2101 Thaler Ave., Ann Arbor,
        MI<br />
        Valerie Mates (board) 406 W. Liberty, Ann Arbor, MI<br />
        Misti A. Tucker (board) 2523 Torrey Ave., Ann Arbor, MI</p>
      </td>

      <td valign="top">
        <span class="c4"><strong>b</strong> Annual
        compensation</span>

        <div class="c1">
          All board members<br />
          are volunteers<br />
          and receive no<br />
          compensation
        </div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>c</strong> Do any of the above
      persons serve as members of the governing board by reason of
      being public officials or being appointed by public
      officials?<br />
      If "Yes," name those persons and explain the basis of their
      selection or appointment.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>d</strong> Are any members of
      the organization's governing body "disqualified persons" with
      respect to the organization (other than by reason of being a
      member of the governing body) or do any of the members have
      either a business or family relationship with "disqualied
      persons"? (See <strong>Specific Instructions</strong> for
      Part II, Line 4d, on page 3.)<br />
      If "Yes," explain.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>5</strong> Does the organization
      control or is it controlled by any other
      organization?</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4">Is the organization the outgrowth of (or
      successor to) another organization, or does it have a special
      relationship with another organization by reason of
      interlocking directorates or other factors?</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4">If either of these questions is answered
      "Yes," explain.</span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>6</strong> Does or will the
      organization directly or indirectly engage in any of the
      following transactions with any political organization or
      other exempt organization (other than a 501(c)(3)
      organization): <strong>(a)</strong> grants;
      <strong>(b)</strong> purchases or sales of assets;
      <strong>(c)</strong> rental of facilities or equipment;
      <strong>(d)</strong> loans or loan guarantees;
      <strong>(e)</strong> reimbursement arrangements;
      <strong>(f)</strong> preformance of services, membership, or
      fundraising solicitation; <strong>(g)</strong> sharing of
      facilities, equipment, mailing lists or other assets, or paid
      employees?<br />
      If "Yes," explain fully and identify the other organizations
      involved.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>7</strong> Is the organization
      financially accountable to any other organization?<br />
      If "Yes," explain and idenfity the organization. Include
      details concerning accountability or attach copies of reports
      if any have been submitted.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <div class="c2">
    Page 4
  </div>
  <hr />
  <p><strong>Part II: Activities and Operational Information</strong>
  (Continued)</p>
  <hr />
  <p><strong>8</strong> What assets does the organization have that
  are used in the performance of its exempt function? (Do not
  include property producing investment income.) If any assets are
  not fully operation, explain their status, what additional steps
  remain to be completed, and when such final steps will be taken.
  If "None," indicate "N/A."</p>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications has the following assets:</p>

  <table>
    <tr>
      <td>1</td>

      <td>Sun 4/670 dual-processor computer with 6Gig disk. Main
      Grex computer. Operational.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>1</td>

      <td>Sun 4/260 computer with 2Gig disk. Backup computer.
      Operational.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>16</td>

      <td>Modems. For dial-in lines. Operational.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>2</td>

      <td>Chase IOLan terminal servers. To interface the modems to
      Grex. Operational.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>2</td>

      <td>Ascend P50 ISDN routers. To interface Grex to the
      Internet. Operational.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>1</td>

      <td>486 computer. Old router, now used for network
      administration. Operational.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>1</td>

      <td>Pentium computer. Future mail server. Awaiting funds to
      purchase a disk.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td></td>

      <td>A desk, various chairs and shelves and office
      fixtures.</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td></td>

      <td>Various spare parts and tools.</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>9</strong> Will the organization
      be the beneficiary of tax-exempt bond financing within the
      next 2 years?</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>10a</strong> Will any of the
      organization's facilities or operations be managed by another
      organization or individual under a contractual
      agreement?</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>b</strong> Is the organization a
      party to any leases?</span></td>

      <td align="right">[X] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [&nbsp;]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  
  <p><span class="c4">If either of these questions is answered
  "Yes" attach a copy of the contracts and explain the relationship
  between the applicant and the other parties.</span></p>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications rents a small room for its computer
  equipment at [a location] from Washtenaw Reality. No one
  associated with Washtenaw Reality has any connection to
  Cyberspace Communications beyond this rental agreement. A copy of
  the lease, which is somewhat informal, is on the next page.</p>

  <p><em>Note: I haven't typed the lease into the HTML version of
  this document yet. - jan</em></p>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>11</strong> Is the organization
      a membership organization?</span></td>

      <td align="right">[X] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [&nbsp;]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  
  <p><span class="c4">If "Yes," complete the following:</span></p>

  <p class="c7"><strong>a</strong> Describe the organization's
  membership requirements and attach a schedule of membership fees
  and dues.</p>

  <p>Membership costs $6 a month, or $60 a year. Members are also
  asked to provide some form of ID, which is not otherwise required
  from our users.</p>

  <p class="c7"><strong>b</strong> Describe the organizations
  present and proposed efforts to attract members and attach a copy
  of any descriptive literature or promotional material used for
  this purpose.</p>

  <p>The web pages and login screens on Grex contain notices asking
  users to consider becoming members. Membership is often mentioned
  in our public discussion forums, especially those relating to the
  administration of the system. The following text is displayed to
  users who ask for more information on-line:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <pre>
Thanks for asking how to support Grex.  You don't have to pay to use Grex, 
but users' donations pay all the bills.  If users don't support Grex, it 
will go away.  Please support this valuable community resource.

The best way to support Grex is to become a member.  Members get to:
  - vote in Grex elections (if you've paid for three months or more)
  - receive the 'Wizard in Training' manual free (again with 3 months)
  - use our internet link.

Organizations may also support Grex and be recognized as Institutional 
members.  Institutional members have the same privileges as regular 
members, except the right to vote.

The minimum membership dues donation - Individual or Institutional - is 
$6/month or $60/year (US currency). Send a personal check or enclose a copy 
of other ID with your dues.  Other donations at any time from members or 
non-members are welcome.  Write to 'aruba' for more info.  Send cash, 
checks or money orders to:

Cyberspace Communications Inc
P.O. Box 4432
Ann Arbor, MI 48106-4432
</pre>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Cyberspace Communications occasionally circulates
  fliers and places advertisements in various publications, but
  these are primarily designed to attract users to the system, not
  to win new members.</p>

  <p class="c7"><strong>c</strong> What benefits do (or will) the
  members receive in exchange for their payments?</p>

  <p>Individual members receive the right to vote in board
  elections and run for board positions. They may call for and vote
  in referenda.</p>

  <p>Institutional members do not have the right to vote.</p>

  <p>All members may receive, if they like, a copy of a 23-page
  photocopied user manual. This is also available to all users for
  our cost of one dollar.</p>

  <p>Members do not receive any special privileges in connecting to
  Grex or using any services on Grex itself. However, they do have
  have expanded privileges in connecting from Grex to other
  computers on the Internet. The most important Internet services,
  E-mail and web browsing, are free to all Grex users, but only
  members can use their Grex accounts to do such things as use a
  'telnet' program to log into another system on the net, or use an
  'ftp' program to transfer files to and from other systems on the
  net, or use an 'irc' program to access the Internet Relay Chat.
  These are services that we cannot offer to thousands of anonymous
  users because we lack the resources to support them, and, in some
  cases, because they would enable hackers to use our system as a
  safe base for attacking other systems on the Internet. Since
  these services are not of much interest to most people and are
  provided with much better quality by even the least expensive
  commercial Internet service providers, they do not seem to be a
  large incentive for most of our members.</p>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>12a</strong> If the organization
      provides benefits, services, or products, are the recipients
      required, or will they be required, to pay for them?<br />
      If "Yes," explain how the charges are determined and attach a
      copy of the current fee schedule.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[X] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [&nbsp;]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <p>Only as described in the response to item 11c above.</p>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>b</strong> Does or will the
      organization limit its benefits, services, or products to
      specific individuals or classes of individuals?<br />
      If "Yes," explain how the recipients or beneficiaries are or
      will be selected.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>13</strong> Does or will the
      organization attempt to influence legislation?<br />
      If "Yes," explain. Also give an estimate of the percentage of
      the organization's time and funds that it devotes or plans to
      devote to this activity.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[X] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [&nbsp;]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications does not and will not attempt to
  influence legislation as a substantial activity. Legislation is
  often discussed on our system by our users, but Cyberspace
  Communications does not limit participation in or otherwise
  attempt to influence the content of such discussions. Cyberspace
  Communications may, in the case of legislation in areas that
  would directly impact our ability to perform our mission (e.g.,
  Internet free speech and privacy), take a public stance on
  issues, but this would be unusual and never a substantial part of
  our activities. Our only such action to date was supporting last
  year's "blue ribbon campaign" against the "Communications Decency
  Act" by temporarily blacking out our web page. Given the
  uncertain future of Internet legislation, the possibility that
  Cyberspace Communications would find it necessary to make more
  substantial lobbying efforts, as allowed for under section
  501(h), cannot be excluded, but our plan and firm expectation is
  that lobbying will continue to account for less than a hundredth
  of one percent of our activities.</p>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>14</strong> Does or will the
      organization intervene in any way in political campaigns,
      including publication or distribution of statements?<br />
      If "Yes," explain fully.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <p>Although Cyberspace Communications does not and will not
  support any candidate for any office, any of our users may
  publish, distribute and discuss campaign materials through our
  system. Cyberspace Communications does not limit participation in
  or otherwise attempt to influence the content of such
  discussions, and people of all views would be welcome to join
  in.</p>
  <hr />

  <div class="c2">
    Page 5
  </div>
  <hr />
  <p><strong>Part III: Technical Requirements</strong></p>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>1</strong> Are you filing Form
      1023 within 15 months from the end of the month in which your
      organization was created or formed?<br />
      If you answer "Yes," do not answer questions on lines 2
      through 7 below.</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>2</strong> If one of the exceptions to
  the 15-month filing requirement shown below applies, check the
  appropriate box and proceed to question 8.</span></p>

  <p class="c7"><strong>Exceptions-</strong>You are not required to
  file an exemption application within 15 months if the
  organization:</p>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td>[&nbsp;]</td>

      <td><strong>a</strong></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Is a church, interchurch organization of
      local units of a church, a confention or association of
      churches, or an integrated auxiliary of a church. See
      Specific Instructions, Line 2a, on page 4.</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>[&nbsp;]</td>

      <td><strong>b</strong></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Is not a private foundation and normally
      has gross receipts of not more than $5,000 in each tax year;
      or</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>[&nbsp;]</td>

      <td><strong>c</strong></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Is a subordinate organization covered by
      a group exemption letter, but only if the parent or
      supervisory organization timely submitted a otice covering
      the subordinate.</span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td>
        <span class="c4"><strong>3</strong> If the organization
        does not meet any of the expections on line 2 above, are
        you filing Form 1023 within 27 months from the end of the
        month in which the organization was created or
        formed?</span>

        <p class="c7">If "Yes," your organization qualifies under
        section 4.01 of Rev. Proc. 92-85, 1992-2 C.B. 490 for an
        automatic 12-month extension of the 15-month filing
        requirement. Do not answer questions 4 through 7.</p>

        <p class="c7">If "No," answer question 4.</p>
      </td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td>
        <span class="c4"><strong>4</strong> If you answer "No," to
        question <strong>3</strong>, has the organization been
        contacted by the IRS regarding its failure to file Form
        1023 within 27 months from the end of the month in which
        the organization was created or formed?</span>

        <p class="c7">If "No," your organization is requesting an
        extension of time to apply under the "reasonable action and
        good faith" requirements of section 5.01 of Rev. Proc.
        92-85. Do not answer questions 5 through 7.</p>

        <p class="c7">If "Yes," answer question 5.</p>
      </td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp; [X]
      <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td>
        <span class="c4"><strong>5</strong> If you answer "Yes," to
        question <strong>4</strong>, does the organization wish to
        request relief from the 15-month filing requirement?</span>

        <p class="c7">If "Yes," give the reasons for not filing
        this application prior to being contacted by the IRS. See
        Specific Instructions, Line 5 on page 4, before completing
        this item. Do not answer questions 6 and 7.</p>

        <p class="c7">If "No," answer question 6.</p>
      </td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp;
      [&nbsp;] <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>6</strong> If you answer "No" to
      question 5, your organization's qualification as a section
      501(c)(3) organization can be recognized only from the date
      this application is filed with your key District Director.
      Therefore, do you want us to consider this application as a
      request of exemption as a section 501(c)(3) organization from
      the date the application is received and not retroactively to
      the date the organization was created or formed?</span></td>

      <td align="right">[&nbsp;] <strong>Yes</strong>&nbsp;
      [&nbsp;] <strong>No</strong>&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>7</strong> If you answer "Yes" to
  question 6 above and wish to request recognition of section
  501(c)(4) status for the period beginning with the date the
  organization was formed and ending with the date the Form 1023
  application was received (the effective data of the
  organization's section 501(c)(3) status), check here &gt;
  [&nbsp;] and attach a completed page 1 of Form 1024 to this
  application.</span></p>
  <hr />

  <div class="c2">
    Page 6
  </div>
  <hr />
  <p><strong>Part III: Technical Requirements</strong> (Continued)</p>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>8</strong> Is the organization a private
  foundation?</span></p>

  <table>
    <tr>
      <td>[&nbsp;]</td>

      <td><strong>Yes</strong></td>

      <td>(answer question 9.)</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>[X]</td>

      <td><strong>No</strong></td>

      <td>(answer question 10 and proceed as instructed.)</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>9</strong> If you answered "Yes" to
  question 8, does the organization claim to be a private operating
  foundation?</span></p>

  <table>
    <tr>
      <td>[&nbsp;]</td>

      <td><strong>Yes</strong></td>

      <td>(Complete Schedule E.)</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td>[&nbsp;]</td>

      <td><strong>No</strong></td>

      <td></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>10</strong> If you answer "No" to
  question 8, indeicate the public charity classification the
  organization is requesting by checking the box below that most
  appropriatedly applies:</span></p>

  <p class="c7"><strong>THE ORGANIZATION IS NOT A PRIVATE
  FOUNDATION BECAUSE IT QUALIFIES:</strong></p>

  <table width="100%" border="1">
    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>a</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As a church or a convention
      or association of churches<br />
      (CHURCHES MUST COMPLETE SCHEDULE A.)</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(1)<br />
      and 170(b)(1)(A)(i)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>b</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As a school (MUST COMPLETE
      SCHEDULE B.)</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(1)<br />
      and 170(b)(1)(A)(ii)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>c</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As a hospital or
      cooperative hospital service organization, or a medical
      research organization operated with a hospital (MUST COMPLETE
      SCHEDULE C.)</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(1)<br />
      and 170(b)(1)(A)(iii)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>d</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As a governmental unit
      described in section 170(c)(1).</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(1)<br />
      and 170(b)(1)(A)(v)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>e</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As being operated solely
      for the benefit of, or in connection with, one or more of the
      organizations described in <strong>a</strong> through
      <strong>d, g, h,</strong> or <strong>i</strong><br />
      (MUST COMPLETE SCHEDULE D.)</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(3)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>f</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As being organized and
      operated exclusively for testing for public
      safety.</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(4)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>g</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As being operated for the
      benefit of a college or university that is owned or operated
      by a governmental unit.</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(1)<br />
      and 170(b)(1)(A)(iv)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>h</strong> [X]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As receiving a substantial
      part of its support in the form of contributions from
      publicly supported organizations, from a governmental unit,
      or from the general public.</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(1)<br />
      and 170(b)(1)(A)(vi)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>i</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">As normally receiving not
      more than one-third of its support from gross investment
      income and more than one-third of its support from
      contributions, membership fees, and gross receipts from
      activities related to its exempt functions (subject to
      certain exclusions).</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(2)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><strong>j</strong> [&nbsp;]</td>

      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">The organization is a
      publicly supported organization but is not sure whether it
      meets the public support test of block <strong>h</strong> or
      block <strong>i</strong>. The organization would like the IRS
      to decide the proper classification.</span></td>

      <td><span class="c4">Sections 509(a)(1)<br />
      and 170(b)(1)(A)(vi)<br />
      or Sections 509(a)(2)</span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>

  <div class="c8">
    <strong>If you checked one of the boxes a through f in question
    10, go to question<br />
    15. If you checked box g in question 10, go to questions 12 and
    13.<br />
    If you checked box h, i, or j, in question 10, go to questions
    11.</strong>
  </div>

  <div class="c2">
    Page 7
  </div>
  <hr />
  <p><strong>Part III: Technical Requirements</strong> (Continued)</p>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>11</strong> If you checked box
  <strong>h, i,</strong> or <strong>j</strong> in question 10, has
  the organization completed a tax year of at least 8
  months?</span></p>

  <table>
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4">[X]</span></td>

      <td colspan="2"><span class="c4">Yes-Indicate whether you are
      requesting:</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td></td>

      <td><span class="c4">[X] A definitive ruling (Answer
      questions 12 through 15.)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td></td>

      <td><span class="c4">[&nbsp;] An advance ruling (Answer
      questions 12 through 15 and attach two Forms 872-C completed
      and signed.)</span></td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td valign="top"><span class="c4">[&nbsp;]</span></td>

      <td colspan="2"><span class="c4">No-<strong>You must request
      an advance ruling by completeing and signing two Forms 872-C
      and attaching them to the application.</strong></span></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />
  <p class="c4"><strong>12</strong> If the organization received
  any unusual grants during the tax years shown in Part IV-A,
  attach a list for each year showing the name of the contributor;
  the date and amount of the grant; and a breif description of the
  nature of the grant.</p>

  <p>N/A</p>
  <hr />
  <p><span class="c4"><strong>13</strong> If you are requesting a
  definitive ruling under sections 170(b)(1)(A)(iv) or (vi), check
  here &gt; [</span>X<span class="c4">] and:</span></p>

  <table width="100%">
    <tr>
      <td><span class="c4"><strong>a</strong> Enter 2% of line 8,
      column (e), Total, of Part IV-A.</span></td>

      <td align="right">476.17</td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
      <td colspan="2">
        <span class="c4"><strong>b</strong> Attach a list showing
        the name and amount contributed by each person (other than
        a government unit or a "publicly supported" organization)
        whose total gifts, grants, contributions, etc., were more
        than the amount entered on line <strong>13a</strong>
        above.</span>

        <p>The following is a complete list of people have
        contributed more than $476.17 to Cyberspace Communications
        since 1/1/95:</p>
        <pre>
    Jan Wolter           $795.18
    Rob Argyropolous     $551.03
</pre>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  <hr />
  <p class="c4"><strong>14</strong> If you are requesting a
  definitive ruling under section 509(a)(2), check here &gt;
  [&nbsp;] and:</p>

  <p class="c7"><strong>a</strong> For each of the years included
  on lines 1, 2, and 9 of Part IV-A, attach a list showing the name
  of and the amount received from each "disqualified person." (For
  a definition of "disqualified person," see <strong>Special
  Instructions,</strong> Part II, Line 4d, on page 3.)</p>

  <p class="c7"><strong>b</strong> For each of the years included
  on line 9 of Part IV-A, attach a list showing the name of and the
  amount received from each pay (other than a "disqualified
  person") whose payments to the organization were more than
  $5,000. For this purpose, "payer" includes, but is not limited
  to, any organization described in sections 170(b)(1)(A)(i)
  thorugh (vi) and any government agency or bureau.</p>
  <hr />
  <p class="c4"><strong>15</strong></p>

  <table>
    <tr>
      <td>
        Indicate if your organization is one of the following. If
        so, complete the required schedule. (Submit only those
        schedules that apply to your organization. <strong>Do not
        submit blank schedules.</strong>)<br />

        <table width="100%" border="1">
          <tr>
            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>Yes</strong></span></td>

            <td align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>No</strong></span></td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4"><strong>If
            "Yes,"<br />
            complete<br />
            schedule:</strong></span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Is the organization a
            church?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">A</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Is the organization, or any part
            of it, a school?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">B</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Is the organization, or any part
            of it, a hospital or medical research
            organizatoin?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">C</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Is the organization a section
            509(a)(3) supporting organization?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">D</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Is the organization a private
            operating foundation?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">E</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Is the organization, or any part
            of it, a home for the aged or handicapped?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">F</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Is the organization, or any part
            of it, a child care organization?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">G</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Does the organization provide or
            administer any scholarship benefits, student aid,
            etc?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">H</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4">Has the organization take over, or
            will it take over, the facilites of a "for profit"
            institution?</span></td>

            <td>&nbsp;</td>

            <td align="center">X</td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">I</span></td>
          </tr>
        </table>

        <div class="c2">
          Page 8
        </div>
        <hr />
        <strong>Part IV: Financial Data</strong>
        <hr />
        <span class="c4">Complete the financial statements for the
        current year and for each of the three years immediately
        before it. If in existence less than 4 years, complete the
        statements for each year in existence. <strong>If in
        existence less than 1 year; also provide proposed budgets
        for the 2 years following the current year.</strong></span>

        <table width="100%" border="1">
          <tr>
            <td colspan="7" align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>A. Statement of Revenue and
            Expenses</strong></span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td rowspan="15">R<br />
            E<br />
            V<br />
            E<br />
            N<br />
            U<br />
            E</td>

            <td></td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">Current<br />
            tax year</span></td>

            <td align="center" colspan="3"><span class="c4">3 prior
            tax years or proposed budget for 2 years</span></td>

            <td rowspan="2" align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>(e) TOTAL</strong></span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td></td>

            <td align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>(a)</strong></span> From 1/1/98<br />
            to 3/31/98</td>

            <td align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>(b)</strong></span> 1997</td>

            <td align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>(b)</strong></span> 1996</td>

            <td align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>(b)</strong></span> 1995</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>1</strong> Gifts, grants,
            and contributions received (not including unusual
            grants- see pages 5 and 6 of the
            instructions)</span></td>

            <td align="right">99.98</td>

            <td align="right">2,942.06</td>

            <td align="right">645.60</td>

            <td align="right">345.00</td>

            <td align="right">4,032.64</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>2</strong> Membership fees
            received</span></td>

            <td align="right">1,647.00</td>

            <td align="right">6,465.00</td>

            <td align="right">5,943.00</td>

            <td align="right">5,721.00</td>

            <td align="right">19,776.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>3</strong> Gross
            investment income (see instructions for
            definition)</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>4</strong> Net income from
            organization's unrelated business activities not
            included on line 3.</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>5</strong> Tax revenues
            levied for and either paid to or spent on behalf of the
            organization</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>6</strong> Value of
            services or facilities furnished by a governmental unit
            to the organization without charge (not including the
            value of services or facilities generally furnished to
            the public without charge)</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>7</strong> Other income
            (not including gain or loss from sale of capital
            assets) (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>8 Total</strong> (add
            lines 1 through 7)</span></td>

            <td align="right">1,746.98</td>

            <td align="right">9,407.06</td>

            <td align="right">6,588.60</td>

            <td align="right">6,066.00</td>

            <td align="right">23,808.64</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>9</strong> Gross receipts
            from admissions, sales of merchandise or services, or
            furnishing facilities in any activity that is not an
            unrelated business within the meaning of section 513.
            Include related cost of sales on line 22.</span></td>

            <td align="right">106.00</td>

            <td align="right">1,899.10</td>

            <td align="right">1,967.26</td>

            <td align="right">1,582.85</td>

            <td align="right">5,555.21</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>10 Total</strong> (add
            lines 8 and 9)</span></td>

            <td align="right">1,852.98</td>

            <td align="right">11,306.16</td>

            <td align="right">8,555.86</td>

            <td align="right">7,648.85</td>

            <td align="right">29,363.85</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>11</strong> Gain or loss
            from sale of capital assets (attach
            schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>12</strong> Unusual
            grants</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>13 Total</strong> (add
            lines 10 through 12)</span></td>

            <td align="right">1,852.98</td>

            <td align="right">11,306.16</td>

            <td align="right">8,555.86</td>

            <td align="right">7,648.85</td>

            <td align="right">29,363.85</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td rowspan="11">E<br />
            X<br />
            P<br />
            E<br />
            N<br />
            S<br />
            E<br />
            S</td>

            <td><span class="c4"><strong>14</strong> Fundraising
            expenses</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">37.50</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>15</strong> Contributions,
            gifts, grants, and similar amounts paid (attach
            schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>16</strong> Disbursements
            to or for benefit of members (attach
            schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>17</strong> Compensation
            of officers, directors, and trustees (attach
            schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>18</strong> Other salaries
            and wages</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>19</strong>
            Interest</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>20</strong> Occupancy
            (rent, utilities, etc)</span></td>

            <td align="right">1,879.89</td>

            <td align="right">7,975.96</td>

            <td align="right">5,244.46</td>

            <td align="right">4.316.49</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>21</strong> Depreciation
            and depletion</span></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>22</strong> Other (attach
            schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="right">588.23</td>

            <td align="right">3,879.76</td>

            <td align="right">2,305.90</td>

            <td align="right">5,083.17</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>23 Total</strong> (add
            lines 14 through 22)</span></td>

            <td align="right">2,468.12</td>

            <td align="right">11,893.22</td>

            <td align="right">7,550.81</td>

            <td align="right">9.399.66</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>24</strong> Excess of
            revenue over expenses (line 13 minus line
            23)</span></td>

            <td align="right">(618.14)</td>

            <td align="right">(587.06)</td>

            <td align="right">1,005.50</td>

            <td align="right">(1,750.81)</td>

            <td align="right" class="color">&nbsp;</td>
          </tr>
        </table>

        <p>&nbsp;</p>

        <div class="c9">
          Schedule of Other Expenses in 1998 (First Quarter)<br />
          Form 1023, Part IV, Section A, Item 22a
        </div>

        <p>The following expenses incurred by Cyberspace
        Communications between 1/1/98 and 3/31/98 were reported in
        line 22a of form 1023, part IV, section A.</p>

        <div class="c1">
          <table border="1">
            <tr>
              <td>New Disk</td>

              <td align="right">216.63</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Excess Sales and Use Tax from 1997</td>

              <td align="right">143.83</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Ethernet hub</td>

              <td align="right">71.37</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Renewal of cyberspace.org domain name</td>

              <td align="right">50.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Rental of P.O. Box for one year</td>

              <td align="right">40.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Backup Tapes</td>

              <td align="right">36.09</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Bank Service Charges</td>

              <td align="right">30.31</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td><strong>TOTAL</strong></td>

              <td align="right">588.23</td>
            </tr>
          </table>
        </div>

        <p>&nbsp;</p>

        <div class="c9">
          Schedule of Other Expenses in 1997<br />
          Form 1023, Part IV, Section A, Item 22b
        </div>

        <p>The following expenses incurred by Cyberspace
        Communications between 1/1/97 and 12/31/97 were reported in
        line 22b of form 1023, part IV, section A.</p>

        <div class="c1">
          <table border="1">
            <tr>
              <td>Parts for New Computer (Sun 4/670)</td>

              <td align="right">1399.60</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>2 ISDN Routers</td>

              <td align="right">1150.93</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Grex Shirts (for resale)</td>

              <td align="right">736.60</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Memory for Sun 4/670</td>

              <td align="right">248.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Registration of grex.org domain name</td>

              <td align="right">100.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Bank Service Charges</td>

              <td align="right">69.96</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>X-10 Interface Card</td>

              <td align="right">40.98</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Rental of P.O. Box for 1 year</td>

              <td align="right">40.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Backup Tapes</td>

              <td align="right">28.49</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Reservation of Park for Meeting</td>

              <td align="right">24.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>New Chair</td>

              <td align="right">21.20</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Annual corporate filing fee</td>

              <td align="right">10.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Renewal of assumed name "Grex"</td>

              <td align="right">10.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td><strong>TOTAL</strong></td>

              <td align="right">3879.76</td>
            </tr>
          </table>
        </div>

        <p>&nbsp;</p>

        <div class="c9">
          Schedule of Other Expenses in 1996<br />
          Form 1023, Part IV, Section A, Item 22c
        </div>

        <p>The following expenses incurred by Cyberspace
        Communications between 1/1/96 and 12/31/96 were reported in
        line 22c of form 1023, part IV, section A.</p>

        <div class="c1">
          <table border="1">
            <tr>
              <td>New Modems</td>

              <td align="right">741.44</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>New Disk</td>

              <td align="right">562.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Misc. Computer Hardware</td>

              <td align="right">400.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Grex T-shirts (for resale)</td>

              <td align="right">204.92</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Bank service charges</td>

              <td align="right">89.42</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Misc. Moving Expenses</td>

              <td align="right">69.30</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>JCC Table Rental</td>

              <td align="right">60.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Printing of Handbooks</td>

              <td align="right">50.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Renewal of domain name "cyberspace.org"</td>

              <td align="right">50.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Rental of P.O. Box for 1 year</td>

              <td align="right">40.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Annual corporate filing fee</td>

              <td align="right">10.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Lock and keys for computer room</td>

              <td align="right">22.62</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Annual corporate filing fee</td>

              <td align="right">10.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>New Checks</td>

              <td align="right">6.20</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td><strong>TOTAL</strong></td>

              <td align="right">2305.90</td>
            </tr>
          </table>
        </div>

        <p>&nbsp;</p>

        <div class="c9">
          Schedule of Other Expenses in 1995<br />
          Form 1023, Part IV, Section A, Item 22d
        </div>

        <p>The following expenses incurred by Cyberspace
        Communications between 1/1/95 and 12/31/95 were reported in
        line 22d of form 1023, part IV, section A.</p>

        <div class="c1">
          <table border="1">
            <tr>
              <td>New processor (Sun 4/260) and Modems</td>

              <td align="right">1591.03</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Misc. 4/260 Parts</td>

              <td align="right">1143.07</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Tape Drive &amp; Moving Expenses</td>

              <td align="right">734.49</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>New Disk</td>

              <td align="right">500.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Moving Expenses</td>

              <td align="right">385.87</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Rounter Components</td>

              <td align="right">324.26</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Misc. Compuer Hardware</td>

              <td align="right">157.26</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>JCC Table Rental</td>

              <td align="right">115.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Bank Service Charges</td>

              <td align="right">59.48</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Keys and Modem Cables</td>

              <td align="right">27.06</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Corporate Filing Fee</td>

              <td align="right">20.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Corporate Registration Fee</td>

              <td align="right">15.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Keys</td>

              <td align="right">12.75</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td><strong>TOTAL</strong></td>

              <td align="right">5070.42</td>
            </tr>
          </table>
        </div>

        <div class="c2">
          Page 9
        </div>
        <hr />
        <strong>Part IV: Financial Data</strong> (Continued)

        <table width="100%" border="1">
          <tr>
            <td colspan="2" align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>B. Balance Sheet (at end of the period
            shown)</strong></span></td>

            <td align="center"><span class="c4">Current tax
            year<br />
            Date</span> 3/31/98</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>Assets</strong></span></td>

            <td rowspan="2" align="center" valign="bottom">
            <strong>1</strong></td>

            <td rowspan="2" align="right" valign="bottom">
            2303.71</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>1</strong>
            Cash</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>2</strong> Accounts
            receivable, net</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>2</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>3</strong>
            Inventories</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>3</strong></td>

            <td align="right">384.10</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>4</strong> Bonds and notes
            receivable (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>4</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>5</strong> Corporate
            stocks (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>5</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>6</strong> Mortgage loans
            (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>6</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>7</strong> Other
            investments (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>7</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>8</strong> Depreciable and
            depletable assets (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>8</strong></td>

            <td align="right">3,850.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>9</strong>
            Land</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>9</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>10</strong> Other assets
            (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>10</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>11</strong> <strong>Total
            assets</strong> (add lines 1 through 10)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>11</strong></td>

            <td align="right">6537.81</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td align="center"><span class=
            "c4"><strong>Liabilities</strong></span></td>

            <td rowspan="2" align="center" valign="bottom">
            <strong>12</strong></td>

            <td rowspan="2" align="right" valign="bottom">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>12</strong> Accounts
            payable</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>13</strong> Contributions,
            gifts, grants, etc., payable</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>13</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>14</strong> Mortgages and
            notes payable (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>14</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>15</strong> Other
            liabilities (attach schedule)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>15</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>16</strong> <strong>Total
            liabilities</strong> (add lines 12 through
            15)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>16</strong></td>

            <td align="right">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td align="center"><span class="c4"><strong>Fund
            Balances or Net Assets</strong></span></td>

            <td rowspan="2" align="center" valign="bottom">
            <strong>17</strong></td>

            <td rowspan="2" align="right" valign="bottom">0.00</td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>17</strong> Total fund
            balances of net assets</span></td>
          </tr>

          <tr>
            <td><span class="c4"><strong>18</strong> <strong>Total
            liabilities and fund balances or net assets</strong>
            (add line 16 and line 17)</span></td>

            <td align="center"><strong>18</strong></td>

            <td align="right">6537.81</td>
          </tr>
        </table><span class="c4">If there has been any substantial
        change in any aspect of the organization's financial
        activities since the end of the period shown above, check
        the box and attach a detailed explanation. &gt;
        [&nbsp;]</span>
        <hr />

        <div class="c9">
          Schedule of Depreciable and Depletable Assets<br />
          Form 1023, Part IV, Section B, Item 8
        </div>

        <p>Cyberspace Communications has the following assets
        reported on line 8 of form 1023, part IV.B. The prices
        given are estimates based on recent market values of
        similar second-hand equipment, however much of this
        equipment is rather exotic and obsolete, and market prices
        vary widely.</p>

        <div class="c1">
          <table border="1">
            <tr>
              <td>Sun 4/670 computer (main Grex computer)</td>

              <td align="right">1650.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>2 Ascend Pipeline P50 routers</td>

              <td align="right">1000.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>2 Chase IOLan terminal servers</td>

              <td align="right">800.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>15 modems</td>

              <td align="right">75.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Sun 4/370 computer parts</td>

              <td align="right">50.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Sun 4/260 computer (backup machine)</td>

              <td align="right">25.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Other computer parts and equipment</td>

              <td align="right">200.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td>Office furniture and tools</td>

              <td align="right">50.00</td>
            </tr>

            <tr>
              <td><strong>TOTAL</strong></td>

              <td align="right">3850.00</td>
            </tr>
          </table>
        </div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</body>
</html>
