<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Why Some Systems Can't Deliver Mail to Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Why Some Systems Can't Deliver Mail to <span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p>Although, in theory, <a href="#ietf"><em>internet
  standards</em></a> ought to permit grex to receive mail from any
  site, in practice, there are sometimes reasons why we find it
  necessary to disable mail from a particular site. The following
  is a list of sites we've disabled; follow the link to learn more
  details. <a href="#note">(Follow this link if you run one of
  these systems).</a></p>

  <h2>Some sites we don't like</h2>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="#gecom"><em>ns3.ge.com</em></a>truely excessive
    mail bounces.</li>

    <li><a href=
    "#ukdemocracy"><em>ivision.coloc.web.xara.net</em></a> retries
    right away on class 400 errors.</li>

    <li><a href="#jobserve"><em>jobserve.com - Jobserve
    Ltd.</em></a> sends mail from non-deliverable address.</li>

    <li><a href="#usweb"><em>jobs.usweb.com - USWeb
    Corporation</em></a> sends *lots* of mail to non-deliverable
    address.</li>

    <li><a href="#netspace"><em>netspace.org - Brown University
    student group</em></a> - networking trouble.</li>

    <li><a href="#hotmail"><em>hotmail.com - Hotmail Free
    Email</em></a> - is not <a href=
    "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>
    compliant.</li>

    <li><a href="#msn"><em>msn.com - Microsoft Network</em></a> -
    is not <a href=
    "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>
    compliant.</li>

    <li><a href="#expedia"><em>mx1.expedia.com - Microsoft
    Corp.</em></a> - is not <a href=
    "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>
    compliant.</li>

    <li><a href="#didier"><em>didier.ee.gatech.edu - Georgia
    Institute of Technology</em></a> - is not <a href=
    "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>
    compliant.</li>

    <li><a href="#lyndar"><em>193.97.54.190 -
    lyndar.blr.novell.com</em></a> - is not <a href=
    "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>
    compliant.</li>

    <li><a href="#dnscnacom"><em>dns.cna.com - CNA
    Insurance</em></a> - is not <a href=
    "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>
    compliant.</li>

    <li><a href="#kellogg"><em>gateway.kellogg.com - Kellogg
    Company</em></a> - is not <a href=
    "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>
    compliant.</li>

    <li><a href="#unisys"><em>bbmail1.unisys.com</em></a> - we
    don't accept mail from here, because of a mail loop.</li>

    <li><a href="#wipsys"><em>kmglmail.wipsys.soft.net</em></a> -
    we don't accept mail from mailer-daemon@wipsys.soft.net,
    because it does not exist there.</li>

    <li><a href="#datasys"><em>mail.datasys.net</em></a> - we don't
    accept mail from here, because aliens keep sending and
    resending 199609230951.FAA00296@mail.datasys.net.</li>

    <li><a href="#moneyworld"><em>moneyworld.com</em></a> -
    spam.</li>

    <li><a href="#moneyworld"><em>natureplus.com</em></a> -
    spam.</li>

    <li><a href="#mobiusloop"><em>po*.wam.umd.edu -
    *@mobius.loop</em></a> - we don't accept mail from
    owner-rage-l@mobius.loop, because it does not exist.</li>

    <li><a href="#c2"><em>c2.net</em></a> - endless mail to one of
    our users.</li>

    <li><a href="#cybermirror1"><em>cybermirror1.com</em></a> -
    misconfigured automatic mail response system.</li>

    <li><a href="#seepz"><em>seepz.tcs.co.in</em></a> - bombarding
    user with full mailbox.</li>

    <li><a href="#delhi"><em>delhi.tcs.co.in</em></a> - bad mailer
    configuration.</li>

    <li><a href="#pacbell"><em>mail-gw.pacbell.net</em></a> -
    defective anti-spam rule can be used to bombard random
    users.</li>

    <li><a href="#dmshouston"><em>dmshouston.net</em></a> - does
    not accept mail from &lt;&gt;</li>

    <li><a href="#erosmail"><em>qmail.erosmail.com</em></a> - web
    server went insane</li>

    <li><a href="#infophil"><em>bali.infophil.com</em></a> - no way
    to unsubscribe; seems to send spam</li>
  </ul>

  <p>In addition, we don't accept mail from sites that appear to
  be dial-up IP connections, especially when we find that they are
  generating mass mail. There are too many of these sites to list
  here, look at</p>
  <pre>
/usr/adm/badsys
  </pre>
  <p>on grex to learn about them.</p>

  <p><a id="note">If you administer any of the above
  systems, and want to fix the problem, you must also</a> <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@cyberspace.org">send mail to us</a> to have us
  re-enable mail service.</p>
  <hr />
  <p>In the past, we had a lot of problems with sites that had the in
  <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC
  1435</a> problem. <a id="more">Here's a list of sites
  that had this problem (a long time ago).</a></p>
  <pre>
146.174.250.100 noping, worf.qntm.com (HP)
152.163.200.7   noping, no incoming smtp (=listmail.aol.com)
198.93.152.11   noping, adeskgate.autodesk.com (SMI-5.3)
200.13.16.8     noping, no incoming smtp (=NIC.DATA.NET.MX, no rev arpa)
204.144.158.25  noping, puck.solbourne.com MS IE Connector
204.70.138.39   noping, neptune.pcy.mci.net Sendmail 8.6.12
205.229.27.7    noping, no incoming smtp (no rev arpa, =uunet technologies, inc.)
206.215.36.2    noping, no incoming smtp (no rev arpa, =Southern California College)
207.1.151.75    noping, no incoming smtp (h-207-1-151-75.netscape.com)
</pre>
  <hr />
  An earlier version of the mail quota software on grex rejected
  mail with SMTP error 452, which told the remote mail software to
  try again later. (SMTP is described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc821.txt">RFC 821</a>.)
  Some mail systems interpreted <em>later</em> to be a few seconds
  later, which would cause endless problems on grex. We added a
  bunch of systems to badsys to deal with this. We then noticed
  that people whose mailboxes filled up didn't seem to appreciate
  the fact we were holding mail off for them. So we have become
  much more hard-assed. If someone's mailbox fills up, we now
  generate an SMTP 552 error, which causes the remote mail software
  to give up right away. End of problem.

  <p>Here is a list of sites that had this problem:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>lists.xmission.com</li>

    <li>sirius.ctr.columbia.edu</li>

    <li>kira.intranet.org</li>

    <li>biff.kiva.net</li>

    <li>listserv.NoDak.edu</li>

    <li>mailnfs0.tiac.net</li>

    <li>suntan.tandem.com</li>

    <li>geek-gw.ptw.com</li>

    <li>inet-user-gw-1.us.oracle.com</li>
  </ul>
  <hr />
  These sites used to have a problem, but it appears to be resolved
  now.
  <pre>
charis.berean.org       resolved Nov 1996; thanks to chris@oz.kis.net
kingcrab.informix.com   resolved Jan 1997; thanks to dgoebel@informix.com
blueshift.com   resolved 18 Mar 1997; thanks to John Ingram &lt;john@blueshift.com&gt;
netspace.org    resolved ?; thanks to bfisk@netspace.org
</pre>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="c2">c2.net - Community ConneXion</a></h3>We
  don't receive mail from this site, apparently because it was
  originating an endless stream of mail to a user on grex. This was
  done 31 March 1997.
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="moneyworld">moneyworld.com -
  Financial Connections, Inc</a></h3>

  <h3>natureplus.com - NetAmerica USA</h3>We don't receive mail
  from these sites, because they kept sending us spam to forward to
  the rest of the internet, even after being asked not to do this.
  Grex does not have the resources to act as any sort of mail relay
  station, let alone one for spam.

  <p>I don't belive that email to <a href=
  "mailto:willie@MONEYWORLD.COM">Bob Williams</a> works. Perhaps
  you can reach him at(206) 269-0846? Here's his address:</p>

  <address>
    2508 5th Ave, #104<br />
    Seattle, WA 98121
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="cybermirror1">cybermirror1.com -
  Cyber Promotions</a></h3>We don't receive mail from this site,
  because something claiming to be an automatic mail response
  system sent mail to MAILER-DAEMON@cyberspace.org on 2 August
  1997. This mail address does not correspond to a human, and would
  only be used on bounce messages generated by grex. It is a
  serious flaw for an automatic mail response system to reply to a
  bounce message that was most probably triggered by earlier mail
  sent by the automatic mail response system.
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="msn">msn.com - Microsoft
  Network</a></h3>Mail that is sent from Microsoft Network, appears
  (to us) to orginate from a series of machine named
  upsmot01.msn.com, upsmot02.msn.com, upsmot03.msn.com, etc.
  Although these machines all implement <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1191.txt">RFC 1191</a>
  path MTU discovery, they live behind a firewall that does not
  pass any ICMP traffic through. Because of this, TCP connections
  from these machines do not manage to pass complete e-Mail
  messages to grex, and instead hang around consuming network
  bandwith and computing resources on grex until they timeout. This
  problem is explicitly described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>,
  and in that RFC, the authors recommend that such firewalls should
  be modified to pass ICMP message Type 3 Code 4 messages.

  <p>We contacted Microsoft on 17 April 1996, but were unsuccessful
  in correcting the problem. To contact the people in charge of the
  outbound SMTP gateways at Microsoft Network, send mail to
  <a href="mailto:dwhipple@microsoft.com">David Whipple
  &lt;dwhipple@microsoft.com&gt;</a> and <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@msn.com">postmaster@msn.com</a>, or write
  to</p>

  <address>
    <br />
    David Whipple<br />
    One Microsoft Way<br />
    Redmond, WA 98052-6399<br />
    USA
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="expedia">mx1.expedia.com - Microsoft
  Corp.</a></h3>Mail that is sent from Microsoft expedia travel
  services, appears (to us) to orginate from a series of machine
  named mx1.expedia.com, etc. Although these machines all implement
  <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1191.txt">RFC
  1191</a> path MTU discovery, they live behind a firewall that
  does not pass any ICMP traffic through. Because of this, TCP
  connections from these machines do not manage to pass complete
  e-Mail messages to grex, and instead hang around consuming
  network bandwith and computing resources on grex until they
  timeout. This problem is explicitly described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>,
  and in that RFC, the authors recommend that such firewalls should
  be modified to pass ICMP message Type 3 Code 4 messages.

  <p>We contacted Microsoft on 21 March 1997, but were unsuccessful
  in correcting the problem. To contact the people in charge of the
  outbound SMTP gateways at Microsoft Network, send mail to
  <a href="mailto:dwhipple@microsoft.com">David Whipple
  &lt;dwhipple@microsoft.com&gt;</a> and <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@msn.com">postmaster@msn.com</a>, or write
  to</p>

  <address>
    <br />
    David Whipple<br />
    One Microsoft Way<br />
    Redmond, WA 98052-6399<br />
    USA
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="lyndar">lyndar.blr.novell.com - Novell,
  Inc.</a></h3>The machine at IP address 137.97.54.190 appears to
  implement <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1191.txt">RFC 1191</a>
  path MTU discovery, but lives behind a firewall that does not
  pass any ICMP traffic through. Because of this, TCP connections
  from this machine do not manage to pass complete e-Mail messages
  to grex, and instead hang around consuming network bandwith and
  computing resources on grex until they timeout. This problem is
  explicitly described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>,
  and in that RFC, the authors recommend that such firewalls should
  be modified to pass ICMP message Type 3 Code 4 messages.

  <p>This host, 137.65.2.254, also does not have a valid DNS
  in-addr.arpa PTR record. This would not affect mail delivery, but
  is a curious omission.</p>

  <p>We sent a message on 19 March 1997 to <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@blr.novell.com">postmaster@blr.novell.com</a>
  but were unsuccessful in getting any response. We also tried
  contacting Sean Gilkes &lt;sgilkes@novell.com&gt;, Peter Dennis
  Bartok &lt;Peter_Dennis_Bartok@Novell.DE&gt;, and Mark Richardson
  &lt;mark_richardson@NOVELL.COM&gt; but these turned out to be
  invalid addresses. Perhaps it would be worth sending paper mail
  to:</p>

  <address>
    <br />
    Novell GmbH<br />
    Monschauer Str. 12<br />
    D-40549 Duesseldorf<br />
    Germany
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="dnscnacom">dns.cna.com - CNA
  Insurance</a></h3>The machine dns.cna.com (159.10.4.25) appears
  to implement <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1191.txt">RFC 1191</a>
  path MTU discovery, but lives behind a firewall that does not
  pass any ICMP traffic through. Because of this, TCP connections
  from this machine do not manage to pass complete e-Mail messages
  to grex, and instead hang around consuming network bandwith and
  computing resources on grex until they timeout. This problem is
  explicitly described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>,
  and in that RFC, the authors recommend that such firewalls should
  be modified to pass ICMP message Type 3 Code 4 messages.

  <p>We sent a message on 25 March 1997 to <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@sch1p116.cna.com">postmaster@sch1p116.cna.com</a>,
  and <a href=
  "mailto:root@sch1p116.cna.com">root@sch1p116.cna.com</a>, but
  were unsuccessful in getting any response (as of 27 March 1997).
  We also tried contacting David Hillman
  &lt;david.hillman@cna.com&gt; with no more luck. In fact, David
  Hillman &lt;david.hillman@cna.com&gt; turned out to be an invalid
  mail address. Perhaps it would be worth sending paper mail
  to:</p>

  <address>
    <br />
    CNA Plaza<br />
    Chicago, IL 60685<br />
    USA
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="kellogg">gateway.kellogg.com - Kellogg
  Company</a></h3>The machine gateway.kellogg.com (198.108.149.2)
  appears to implement <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1191.txt">RFC 1191</a>
  path MTU discovery, but lives behind a firewall that does not
  pass any ICMP traffic through. Because of this, TCP connections
  from this machine do not manage to pass complete e-Mail messages
  to grex, and instead hang around consuming network bandwith and
  computing resources on grex until they timeout. This problem is
  explicitly described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>,
  and in that RFC, the authors recommend that such firewalls should
  be modified to pass ICMP message Type 3 Code 4 messages.

  <p>We sent a message on 25 March 1997 to <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@gateway.kellogg.com">postmaster@gateway.kellogg.com</a>
  but were unsuccessful in getting any response (as of 27 March
  1997). We also tried contacting Dave Gibson
  &lt;dave.gibson@kellogg.com&gt;, and Vinh Tran
  &lt;vinh-chi.tran@kellogg.com&gt;, with no more luck. In fact,
  Dave Gibson &lt;dave.gibson@kellogg.com&gt;, and Vinh Tran
  &lt;vinh-chi.tran@kellogg.com&gt;, turned out to be invalid mail
  addresses. Perhaps it would be worth sending paper mail to:</p>

  <address>
    <br />
    Kellogg Company<br />
    235 Porter Street<br />
    Battle Creek, MI 49017<br />
    USA
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="didier">didier.ee.gatech.edu - Georgia
  Institute of Technology</a></h3>The machine didier.ee.gatech.edu
  appears to implement <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1191.txt">RFC 1191</a>
  path MTU discovery, but lives behind a firewall that does not
  pass any ICMP traffic through. Because of this, TCP connections
  from this machine do not manage to pass complete e-Mail messages
  to grex, and instead hang around consuming network bandwith and
  computing resources on grex until they timeout. This problem is
  explicitly described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>,
  and in that RFC, the authors recommend that such firewalls should
  be modified to pass ICMP message Type 3 Code 4 messages.

  <p>We sent a message to <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@ee.gatech.edu">postmaster@ee.gatech.edu</a> on
  21 March 1997, but were unsuccessful in getting any response. It
  may also be possible to contact the appropriate: people by
  writing:</p>

  <address>
    <br />
    Office of Computing Services<br />
    258 Fourth Street, Rich Building<br />
    Atlanta, GA 30332<br />
    USA
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id=
  "ukdemocracy">ivision.coloc.web.xara.net</a></h3>This host
  retries right away when our mail returns a 400 class error. This
  is wrong, and wastes CPU and network bandwidth on our end. The
  retry rate should be more like once every 30 minutes, with some
  sort of exponential backoff algorithm. We haven't contacted
  xara.net yet, as of 14-Dec-1997.
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="gecom">ns3.ge.com - General Electric
  Company.</a></h3>This host is generating a truely excessive
  number of bounces. A lot of mail seems to be going to
  sachinvt@cyberspace.org. This mail is apparently being sent from
  &lt;Sachin.Thakur@gepex.ge.com&gt;. This has been going on for 7
  days, since 4-Oct-1999, and is taking up a lot of our network
  bandwidth. C'mon, guys, do you *really* need to do this?
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="jobserve">jobserve.com - Jobserve
  Ltd.</a></h3>We don't accept mail from
  nobody@deliver-5.tiptree.jobserve.com because, if it cannot be
  delivered on grex, the bounce message can't be returned to the
  originating agent.
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="usweb">jobs.usweb.com - USWeb
  Corporation</a></h3>We don't accept mail from this system,
  because the mailer at this site appears to be broken, and was
  bombarding us with tons of mail for a non-existant address on 17
  May 1997.
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="hotmail">hotmail.com - Hotmail Free
  Email</a></h3>Mail that is sent from Hotmail, appears (to us) to
  orginate from a series of machine named F5.hotmail.com,
  F19.hotmail.com, F25.hotmail.com, etc.

  <p>Although these machines all implement <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1191.txt">RFC 1191</a>
  path MTU discovery, they live behind a firewall that does not
  pass any ICMP traffic through. Because of this, TCP connections
  from these machines do not manage to pass complete e-Mail
  messages to grex, and instead hang around consuming network
  bandwith and computing resources on grex until they timeout. This
  problem is explicitly described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>,
  and in that RFC, the authors recommend that such firewalls should
  be modified to pass ICMP message Type 3 Code 4 messages.</p>

  <p>We have informed Hotmail (<a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@hotmail.com">postmaster@hotmail.com</a>) on 13
  March 1997.</p>

  <p>Some additional contact points, if you would like to contact
  them, are <a href="mailto:joshin@HOTMAIL.COM">Joshua Goldsmith
  &lt;joshin@HOTMAIL.COM&gt;</a>, at phone number (408) 222-7005
  ext. 154., and <a href="mailto:jsmith@HOTMAIL.COM">Jack Smith
  &lt;jsmith@HOTMAIL.COM&gt;</a>, at phone number (408)
  222-7000.</p>

  <address>
    Javasoft<br />
    1290 Oakmead Parkway<br />
    Suite 218<br />
    Sunnyvale, CA 94086<br />
    USA
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id=
  "wipsys">kmglmail.wipsys.wipsys.soft.net.</a></h3>We don't accept
  mail from mailer-daemon@wipsys.soft.net if sent from this
  address, because if it cannot be delivered on grex, it can't be
  returned to wipsys.
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="mobiusloop">po*.wam.umd.edu -
  *@mobius.loop</a></h3>We don't accept mail from
  owner-rage-l@mobius.loop (or any other mobius.loop address)
  because if it cannot be delivered on grex, it can't be returned
  to knot.org.
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="datasys">mail.datasys.net - DSS
  Online</a></h3>There appears to be a problem, perhaps temporary
  in nature, that had resulted in multiple copies of a message with
  message-ID 199609230951.FAA00296@mail.datasys.net being sent to
  grex. This is very bad, and had filled up one person's mailbox.

  <p>We have informed <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@mail.datasys.net">postmaster@mail.datasys.net</a>
  on Wednesday, 25 September 1996 00:30 -400, but never received
  any reply.</p>

  <p>Some additional contact points, if you would like to contact
  them, are <a href=
  "mailto:administrator@MAIL.DATASYS.NET">administrator@MAIL.DATASYS.NET</a>,
  at phone number (912) 241-0607.</p>

  <address>
    2300 Madison Highway<br />
    Valdosta, GA 31603<br />
    USA
  </address>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="unisys">bbmail1.unisys.com - Unisys
  Corporation</a></h3>There is a mail loop between
  sureshv@tulblr.unisys.com and sureshv@nether.net. Mail from
  sureshv@tulblr.unisys.com is forwarded to grex as well as
  nether.net. The result is that about 5-6 copies of every message
  sent to sureshv@tulblr.unisys.com are shipped to grex, and the
  last one comes with too many <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc822.txt">RFC 822</a>
  "Received:" timestamps so is sent to postmaster@cyberspace.org
  instead. We, the people who read postmaster mail on grex, really
  don't want sureshv's private mail. We contacted both Informix and
  Nether.net on 12 October 1997, but never received any response
  (as of 16 January, 1997).

  <p>To contact the people in charge at unisys, you might try
  sending mail to <a href=
  "mailto:CLIEBSAC@PO2.RSM.UNISYS.COM">Chris Liebsack</a>, the
  technical and zone contact for unisys.com, or <a href=
  "mailto:postmaster@unisys.com">postmaster@unisys.com</a> . It is
  also possible to send US postal mail to</p>

  <address>
    <br />
    Unisys Corporate Headquarters<br />
    Blue Bell, PA 19424-0001<br />
    U.S.A.
  </address>

  <p>To contact the people in charge at nether.net, you might try
  sending mail to <a href="mailto:jared@CIC.NET">Jared Mauch</a>,
  Jared Mauch also has a FAX telephone number, 313-998-6105. It is
  also possible to send US postal mail to</p>

  <address>
    <br />
    Nether Network<br />
    3015 Whisperwood Dr. #261<br />
    Ann Arbor, MI 48105<br />
    USA
  </address>

  <p>Good luck. We received no response from these e-mail
  addresses.</p>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="seepz">seepz.tcs.co.in - ?</a></h3>We
  don't accept mail from this system for user kanni@cyberspace.org
  (or any other user). because the mailer at this site was
  attempting to connect to us every few seconds to deliver mail,
  and his mailbox was full. Reversa arpa does not work for this
  host; we are not sure exactly what this host is for, or who uses
  it. Also, this host is sending mail that claims to be from the
  mailbox that filled up on grex; this seems like a really bad
  thing.
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="delhi">delhi.tcs.co.in - ?</a></h3>We
  don't accept mail from this system because the mailer at this
  site was broken on 29 March 1998. The mail software on this
  system generated a mail address consisted entirely of non-ascii
  characters. When grex tried to send mail to this address, it got
  these errors:
  <pre>
554 Infinite loop in ruleset 3, rule 12
554 Infinite loop in ruleset 3, rule 12
</pre>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="pacbell">mail-gw.pacbell.net - Pacific
  Bell Internet Services</a></h3>We don't accept mail from this
  system because the mailer at this site has a defective anti-spam
  rule. The intent of this rule appears to be to prevent this host
  from being used to relay mail. Unfortunately, this rule is
  implemented in the wrong place. Instead of rejecting mail
  <em>before</em> it is accepted, it is accepted, queued, rejected,
  and bounced. The bounce message is not delivered to the
  originating host, which may be long gone, but instead to the
  return path, which may be a completely different host, and point
  to the mailbox of a user who is completely not associated with
  the problem. Very bad.

  <p>2 Mar 1998 - added to badsys.</p>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="infophil">bali.infophil.com -
  InfoPhil, Inc.</a></h3>We don't accept mail from this system
  because this system keeps sending mail to several addresses on
  grex despite our best efforts to remove those addresses from the
  supposed <em>mailing list</em> sent from here. The mail that is
  sent also appears to contain a large amount of commercial
  content, sugggesting that this is actually thinly disguised
  unsolicited commercial e-mail, or spam. We followed the
  directions given to unsubscribe rbk@cyberspace.org on 16 Feb
  1999, with no luck.

  <p>6 Nov 1999 - added to badsys.</p>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="dmshouston">dmshouston.net -
  Networks On-Line</a></h3>We don't accept mail from this system
  because the mailer at this site does not accept bounce messages
  from grex. According to <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc821.txt">RFC 821</a> in
  section 3.6 (page 14), when a mail rejection notice is generated,
  the return path is supposed to be &lt;&gt;. However, when this
  mail is returned to dmshouston.net, this mail is rejected with
  the message
  <pre>
&gt;&gt;&gt; MAIL From:&lt;&gt;
&lt;&lt;&lt; 501 bogus mail from
554 &lt;ThoughtADay-owner@ThoughtADay.com&gt;... Remote protocol error
</pre>This is bad.

  <p>1 Oct 1998 - added to badsys.</p>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="erosmail">qmail.erosmail.com - TropiX
  Talent</a></h3>We don't accept mail from this system because the
  mailer at this site had been sending mail to an invalid address
  at grex for some time, and when we attempted to unsubscribe this
  address, their web server went insane. Apparently, it went into
  some sort of infinite redirect loop, and attempted to unsubscribe
  kelvin@cyberspace.org a whole *bunch* of times. Each attempt
  resulted in generating mail to kelvin. By the time we noticed,
  and turned off the temporary alias, over one megabyte of
  unsubscribe reports had been sent. Their mailer is still busy
  attempting to send more such reports.

  <p>Proper mailing list software notices when mail sent to invalid
  addresses is rejected with "no such user", and proper web
  software does not return redirect pages pointing to itself.</p>

  <p>16 Feb 1999 - added to badsys.</p>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="dlinc">alpha2.dlinc.com - D &amp; L
  Online, Inc</a></h3>We don't accept mail from this system because
  it sends mail as &lt;nobody@dlinc.com&gt;, and if a bounce
  notification is sent to this address, the mailer for the
  dlinc.com domain rejects this. According to <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc821.txt">RFC 821</a> in
  section 3.6 (page 14), when a mail rejection notice is generated,
  the return path is supposed to be &lt;&gt;. However, when this
  mail is returned to alpha1.dlinc.com (the MX host for the
  dlinc.com domain), this mail is rejected with the message
  <pre>
&gt;&gt;&gt; MAIL From:&lt;&gt;
&lt;&lt;&lt; 550 &lt;&gt;... Sender address not in proper format
554 &lt;nobody@dlinc.com&gt;... Remote protocol error
</pre>This is bad. (Sending messages as nobody seems most dubious
in the first place.)

  <p>15 Mar 1999 - added to badsys.</p>
  <hr />

  <h3><a id="ietf">internet standards - some
  pointers</a></h3>ICMP is an integral and necessary part of the
  TCP/IP protocol stack. It is used for MTU path discovery, various
  kinds of IP layer congestion control, TCP error returns, and
  network diagnostic software. Without ICMP, some or all of these
  will not work. Grex is unusual in that its internet connection
  tends to fragment packets, which can cause problems with
  non-compliant internet implementations or sites. Nevertheless, IP
  fragmentation is, in fact, part of the standard, and sites that
  can't handle IP fragmentation are not completely in compliance.

  <p>For more information on internet host requirements, check out
  <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1122.txt">RFC
  1122</a> and <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1123.txt">RFC 1123</a>,
  Requirements for Internet Hosts. For information on TCP, check
  out <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc793.txt">RFC
  793</a> and <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc964.txt">RFC 964</a>. For
  information on ICMP, check out <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc792.txt">RFC 792</a> and
  <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc950.txt">RFC
  950</a>. ICMP and TCP are layered on top of IP, which is
  described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc791.txt">RFC 791</a>. For
  information on path MTU discovery, check out <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1191.txt">RFC 1191</a>.
  SMTP (the mail transport protocol used by grex for incoming mail)
  is described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc821.txt">RFC 821</a> and
  <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc822.txt">RFC
  822</a>. <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1435.txt">RFC 1435</a>
  contains IESG advice on path MTU discovery. <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1858.txt">RFC 1858</a>
  talks about security considerations for IP fragment filtering.
  <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1470.txt">RFC
  1470</a> contains a list of tools that can be used to debug
  TCP/IP networks.</p>

  <p>The IETF standards process is described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1796.txt">RFC 1796</a>
  and <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1818.txt">RFC
  1818</a>. Some of the philosophy behind the internet can be found
  in <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc722.txt">RFC
  722</a>, <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc871.txt">RFC 871</a>,
  <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc875.txt">RFC
  875</a>, <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1118.txt">RFC 1118</a>,
  and <a href="http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1539.txt">RFC
  1539</a>. When grex refuses mail for hosts described in this http
  document, it is, in essence, implementing a greatly updated form
  of the administrative denial of service described in <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc706.txt">RFC 706</a>.</p>

  <p>There are many RFC's that deal with security issues. <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1244.txt">RFC 1244</a>
  contains a general site security handbook. <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1636.txt">RFC 1636</a>
  contains workshop notes on internet security.</p>

  <p>For more general internet information, check out <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1206.txt">RFC 1206</a> -
  new internet user, and <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1207.txt">RFC 1207</a> -
  experienced internet user. <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1392.txt">RFC 1392</a>
  contains an internet glossary. Finally, <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc1855.txt">RFC 1855</a>
  contains a netiquette guide.</p>

  <p>This is merely a starter list of relevant RFC's; for a
  complete list of RFC's, check out <a href=
  "http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/rfc/rfc-by-title.txt/">the RFC
  index file</a>.</p>
  <hr />

  <h3>Contact Information</h3>

  <address>
    <a href="http://www.cyberspace.org/">www.cyberspace.org</a> +
    <a href=
    "mailto:postmaster@cyberspace.org">postmaster@cyberspace.org</a>
  </address>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: badsys.xhtml 1438 2014-03-23 16:39:04Z kentn $</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
