<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>About Cyberspace Communications</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1>Information about Cyberspace Communications</h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
      <p>Cyberspace Communications is a <em>non-profit, tax-exempt</em>
      corporation which provides a computer conferencing system,
      called <q>Grex</q>, to the public, for free.</p>

      <p>Cyberspace Communications functions as an <em>online
      democracy</em>, with policies set by its users. Formally, we are
      <strong>governed by a board of directors elected by our
      members</strong>, but we have a tradition of operating very much
      by a consensus. Topics are always publicly discussed in the
      <a href="/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek:coop">Co-op conference</a> before
      being voted on by the board, and the board is very reluctant to
      decide on anything until a strong consensus has emerged in the
      conference. In addition, any member can call a vote by the
      membership on any subject, and the board has no power to overrule
      the results of such votes. Changes to the bylaws can only be made
      by votes of the membership.</p>

      <p>Day-to-day administration of Grex is performed by the Grex
      staff, whose members are appointed by the board. Like the board
      members, all staff members are volunteers.</p>

    <h2>Mailing Address:</h2>

      <address>
        Cyberspace Communications, Inc.<br />
        P.O. Box 4432<br />
        Ann Arbor, MI 48106-4432, USA.<br />
      </address>

    <h2>Cyberspace Communications Document Archive:</h2>

    <ul>
      <li><a href="articles.xhtml">Articles of Incorporation</a></li>

      <li><a href="bylaws.shtml">Bylaws</a></li>

      <li><a href="501c3.xhtml">Application for 501(c)3 Tax-Exempt
      Status</a></li>

      <li><a href="irs.xhtml">IRS Determination Letter for 501(c)3
      Tax-Exempt Status</a></li>

      <li><a href="board.xhtml">Current Board of Directors</a></li>

      <li><a href="staff.xhtml">Current Staff Members</a></li>

      <li><a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Acoop">Co-Op BBS Conference (policy discussions)</a></li>

      <li><a href="minutes.xhtml">Minutes of Past Board
      Meetings</a></li>

      <li><a href="votes.xhtml">Results of Past Membership
      Votes</a></li>

      <li><a href="policy.xhtml">Log of Policy Decisions</a></li>

      <li><a href="lawsuit/">Lawsuit: <em>Cyberspace vs Engler</em></a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: index.xhtml 1468 2014-04-15 12:53:01Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>

</body>
</html>
