<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/legacy.css";
   /*<![CDATA[*/
    body {
     background-color: #FFFFFF;
    }
    h2.c12 {font-family: Courier}
    blockquote.c11 {font-size: 80%}
    span.c10 {font-family: Courier}
    blockquote.c9 {font-style: italic; font-weight: bold}
    span.c8 {font-family: courier; font-size: 120%}
    blockquote.c7 {font-weight: bold}
    span.c6 {font-family: courier}
    hr.c5 {text-align: left}
    pre.c4 {font-family: courier}
    span.c3 {font-size: 80%}
    div.c2 {text-align: center}
    h1.c1 {font-family: Arial}
   /*]]>*/
  </style>

  <title>Wizard in Training -- Your GREX Beginner's Handbook</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div class="c2">
    <h1 class="c1">Wizard in Training</h1>
    <h2>Your GREX Beginner's Handbook</h2>
  </div>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Table of Contents</h2>

    <table border="1">
      <tr>
        <td>
          <ul>
            <li><a href="#baff">Janitorial Staff</a></li>

            <li><a href="#history">A Bit of History</a></li>

            <li><a href="#how">How GREX Works</a></li>

            <li>
              <a href="#makesense">Making Sense of This (Web)
              Booklet</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#conventions">Type
                Conventions</a></li>

                <li><a href="#bangs">A Note about !s</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#commpsych">The Psychology of Electronic
              Communication</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#emoticons">Emoticons</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#grease">Netiquette: Social Lubricant in
              Cyberspace</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#flames">Flames</a></li>

                <li><a href="#adverts">Advertising</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li><a href="#memqs">GREX Membership: What and
            Why</a></li>

            <li>
              <a href="#donations">Donations: The Lifeblood of a
              Bottom Feeder</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#usefulstuff">Donations Especially
                Useful to GREX</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#ecology">The Ecology of a Small System</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#maillimits">Mail Limits</a></li>

                <li><a href="#resources">Resources: The Final
                Frontier</a></li>

                <li><a href="#whynoISP">Why GREX Isnt an Internet
                Service Provider (ISP)</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#connect">Off to a Good Start - Getting
              Connected to GREX</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#dialin">Dialing in to GREX</a></li>

                <li><a href="#telnet">Using Telnet to Connect to
                GREX</a></li>

                <li><a href="#loggingin">Logging in</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#newuser">Creating a New Account</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#termtype">Finding Your Terminal
                Type</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li><a href="#shells">Selecting a Shell</a></li>

            <li><a href="#changes">Changing Things about your
            Login</a></li>

            <li>
              <a href="#morehelp">Getting More Help</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#infoconf">The Info
                Conference</a></li>

                <li><a href="#helpers">GREX On-Line
                Helpers</a></li>

                <li><a href="#trouble">The Trouble Login</a></li>

                <li><a href="#moredocs">More Documentation</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#confs">Wandering through the Conferences:
              the Real GREX!</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#lingo">Terminology</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>
          </ul>
        </td>

        <td>
          <ul>
            <li><a href="#confstart">Getting into the Conferencing
            System</a></li>

            <li>
              <a href="#conftips">Using the Conferencing System</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#confprompts">Prompts</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confselect">Selecting a
                Conference</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confread">Reading a
                Conference</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confitemlist">Seeing a List of
                Items</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confitemread">Reading Specific
                Items</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confnewread">Reading New Items in a
                Conference</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confresp">Responding to an
                Interesting Item</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confviewresp">Viewing Particular
                Responses</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confenter">Entering a New
                Item</a></li>

                <li><a href="#confforget">Forgetting a Boring or
                Annoying Item</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#email">Getting The Hang Of E-Mail</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#emailer">Selecting a Mailer</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#party">Party</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#noises">Noises</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#www">The World Wide Web</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#lynx">Accessing the Web through
                Lynx</a></li>

                <li><a href="#homepage">Making Your Own Home Page
                on GREX</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li><a href="#mathom">Peek into Your Mathom
            Closet</a></li>

            <li><a href="#finger">Finger</a></li>

            <li>
              <a href="#chatting">Going One-on-One: Using Chat,
              Write, Talk, and Tel</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#chat">Chat and Write</a></li>

                <li><a href="#talk">Talk</a></li>

                <li><a href="#tel">Tel</a></li>

                <li><a href="#mesgN">Preventing People from Writing
                to You</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#textfiles">Text Files and Editors</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#homedir">Your Home Directory</a></li>

                <li><a href="#editors">Editors</a></li>

                <li><a href="#editorinvoke">Using an Editor from
                within PicoSpan or Mail</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li>
              <a href="#updownload">Uploading and Downloading
              Files</a>

              <ul>
                <li><a href="#dialupfiles">Transferring Files over
                a Dial-up Connection</a></li>

                <li><a href="#ftp">FTP</a></li>
              </ul>
            </li>

            <li><a href="#unix">UNIX (Whats That?)</a></li>

            <li><a href="#biblio">Bibliography</a></li>

            <li><a href="#principles">The GREX Statement of
            Principles</a></li>
          </ul>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </table>
  </div>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="baff" id="baff"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Janitorial Staff</h2>
  </div>
  <pre class="c4">
<strong>The 2002 Cyberspace Communications Board of Directors:</strong>
        Eric Bassey (other) - Chair
        Anne Perry (mooncat) - Secretary
        Mark Conger (aruba) - Treasurer
        Mary Remmers (mary)
        STeve André' (steve)
        Greg Fleming (flem)
        Marcus Watts (mdw)
                <em>E-mail the board at</em> <a href=
"mailto:board@grex.org">board@grex.org</a>

<strong>The Grex Staff:</strong>
        STeve André' (steve)              Charles Mitchell (arthurp)
        Mic Giansiracusa (spooked)      John Remmers (remmers)
        Steve Gibbard (scg)             Marcus Watts (mdw)
        Dan Gryniewicz (dang)           Jan Wolter (janc)
        Scott Helmke (scott)            Steve Weiss (srw)
        Valerie Mates (valerie)
                <em>E-mail the staff at</em> <a href=
"mailto:staff@grex.org">staff@grex.org</a>

<strong>Conference Administrators (cfadms):</strong>
        Walter Cramer  (i)              Valerie Mates (valerie)
        Scott Helmke (scott)            John Remmers (remmers)

<strong>Webmaster:</strong>
        Steve Weiss (srw)

<strong>Software Designers:</strong>
        Valerie Mates (valerie)         Mathom
        Mic Giansiracusa (spooked)      New Menus
        John Remmers (remmers)          Vote, Web Vote
        Marcus Watts (mdw)              PicoSpan, Newuser, Telnet Queue, Spam blocks, a bunch of other stuff
        Steve Weiss (srw)               Lynx Menu, Backtalk
        Jan Wolter (janc)               Party, Write, Mesg, Gate, Backtalk, Web Newuser

<strong>This handbook written by:</strong>
        Misti Tucker (mta)              Mark Conger (aruba)
<strong>With help from:</strong>
        STeve André (steve)              Valerie Mates (valerie)
<strong>adapted for the Web by:</strong>
        Eric Bassey (other)
</pre>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" id="history"><span class="c3">Table of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>A Bit of History</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Grex was conceived in 1990 by a dozen people with little more
  in common than a love for computer conferencing. Over the course
  of several months, they met once a week to discuss their ideas
  about how the ideal system might be run, and to work out a common
  vision. The process wasn't always smooth; each founder had very
  clear ideas and there were sometimes differences that were very
  hard to resolve. They persevered and finally arrived at a
  consensus.</p>

  <p>Once their vision for Grex was formed, they spent the next
  several months working to pull the system together. Once they had
  collected the money and equipment their new system would need
  just to open to the public, they agreed amongst themselves that
  they would finance the system's operations out of their own
  pockets for the first year.</p>

  <p>On July 18, 1991, Grex opened its lines to the modeming
  public.</p>

  <p>Grex got its start running on a donated Sun-2/170, with only 5
  phone lines, 4 Meg of RAM, and 2 ancient 80 Meg Fujitsu SMD hard
  drives. It was housed in the warehouse of a generous local
  business owner, Ken Ascher, for just the cost of the electricity
  and telephones. NetMeg, owned and operated by Meg Geddes,
  supplied the Internet mail feed.</p>

  <p>Things have changed some since then. Grex is now living in its
  own apartment, a 12' by 12' room in a building near downtown Ann
  Arbor. We're running on a Sun-4/670 with 384MB of RAM, 31
  gigabytes of disk and 7 dial-in phone lines. Most important, Grex
  is now attached to the Internet by a dedicated DSL
  connection!</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="how" id="how"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>How GREX Works</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications, Inc., is a Michigan non-profit
  corporation.</p>

  <p>Any user may become a member of Grex just by making a donation
  of $2 a month or $18 a year to the system. The membership makes
  all major decisions about the system's direction.</p>

  <p>The Board of Directors, elected by the members of Grex, makes
  routine administrative decisions. The Board normally meets once a
  month. Members (and anyone else who's interested) are welcome to
  attend.</p>

  <p>Daily operations of Grex are managed by an all volunteer
  staff, which is responsible for keeping Grex up and running
  smoothly. The staff is appointed by the board and is responsible
  for keeping Grex up and happy. It's a thankless job that keeps
  them busy for hours every week. (Thanks, folks!) Normally, the
  staff is represented at all board meetings.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="makesense" id="makesense"><span class=
  "c3">Table of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Making Sense of This (Web) Booklet</h2>
  </div>There are a few things you'll need to understand to make
  sense of the instructions in this (web) booklet.

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="conventions" id="conventions"></a>Type
  Conventions</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If I want you to type something,<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c6"><em>it will look like this.</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>If I want to show you what the words on the screen will
  be,<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c6">it will look like this.</span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>So if you see:<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c6">Ok: <em>chat</em></span>
  </blockquote><br />
  it means, type the word chat where you see Ok: on the screen.

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="bangs" id="bangs"></a>A Note about !s</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>There is a convention that many UNIX programs observe: when
  you want to run one program from within another, you type a
  <strong><span class="c6">!</span></strong> (pronounced bang) before the
  command. Most of the examples shown in this booklet dont use a
  <strong><span class="c6">!</span></strong> , but in some cases (such as
  when you are at a menu prompt) you may need one. So in general,
  if a command doesnt work right for you, try putting a
  <strong><span class="c6">!</span></strong> in front of it.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="commpsych" id="commpsych"><span class=
  "c3">Table of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>The Psychology of Electronic Communication</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Communicating electronically is different from talking face to
  face or over the telephone. Without the feedback of facial and
  vocal cues, it's easy to misunderstand, especially because
  English is an inherently ambiguous language.</p>

  <p>Take the time to wordsmith your comments. When you remove the
  ambiguity, you ensure that the hundreds of people who will read
  your words will understand them as you meant them. That can make
  all the difference in the world, especially since Grex has users
  coming in from all over the world, many of whom speak English as
  a second or third language.</p>

  <p>It's also a good idea to give other people the benefit of the
  doubt if they say something that can be taken more than one way.
  As you become more familiar to the Grex old-timers and more
  familiar with the verbal shorthand we've developed, you'll find
  it becomes second nature.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="emoticons" id="emoticons"></a>Emoticons</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>One way to help keep your responses from being misinterpreted
  is to use emoticons (sometimes called smileys) to help readers
  know what facial expression to associate with your words. For
  instance, if you say something in jest, it's a good idea to put a
  <strong><span class="c8">:)</span></strong> after it. If you're sad about
  something, use <strong><span class="c8">:(</span></strong> . If you want to
  wink at someone, use <strong><span class="c8">;)</span></strong> . There
  are many other possibilities - don't hesitate to experiment.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="grease" id="grease"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Netiquette: Social Lubricant in Cyberspace</h2>
  </div>

  <p>As with every community, Cyberspace has a system of norms that
  allows us to get along in harmony most of the time. Various nooks
  have variations on the norms, of course. An excellent Internet
  convention is to try to be generous in interpreting what you
  read, but diplomatic and refined in what you say.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="flames" id="flames"></a>Flames</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>A flame is a personal attack on another user, usually in a
  public forum like the conferences or Party. Public flame fests
  are unpleasant and make the system a stressful place to hang
  out.</p>

  <p>From time to time it's likely that someone will make a remark
  that makes you really angry. When that happens, remember:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>Take time to cool off before you respond.</li>

    <li>If the remark was intentionally provocative, the best
    response is no response.</li>

    <li>Respond to the idea and not the speaker.</li>

    <li>If you feel you absolutely must make a personal remark,
    please take it to e-mail and keep it private.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="adverts" id="adverts"></a>Advertising</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Grex is a not-for-profit organization. It is not a platform
  for serious business transactions. (This applies to private
  individuals as well as companies.) We do however have a
  classifieds conference specifically set up to let people with
  something to peddle meet people who want to barter or buy.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="memqs" id="memqs"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>GREX Membership: What and Why</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Becoming a member of Grex is easy. You can type<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c9">
    support
  </blockquote><br />
  or sometimes<br />

  <blockquote class="c9">
    !support
  </blockquote><br />
  at almost any prompt to get more information.

  <p>But what is a Grex membership, and why should you bother?
  After all, Grex is a free system.</p>

  <p>Well, yes, you are free to use Grex, whether you're a member
  or not. But when you make a donation and become a Grex member,
  you buy a little piece of our collective. You become a part owner
  in an exciting social experiment. You get a voice in the running
  of the system, and most important, you help ensure that this
  valuable community resource can continue to be available to
  everyone.</p>

  <p>Grex is entirely supported by its users. No large corporations
  or government agencies contribute any of the money needed to keep
  the system running. This means Grex is really and truly a grass
  roots organization, and it has the freedom to change in whatever
  directions its members would like. But it also means that it is
  entirely dependent on the good will of its users. If enough
  people don't commit to supporting Grex, it may go away.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="donations" id="donations"><span class=
  "c3">Table of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Donations: The Lifeblood of a Bottom Feeder</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Without donations, Grex wouldn't exist today. We are always
  happy to accept any computer equipment in danger of becoming boat
  anchors and door stops. We use what we can to expand Grex. We
  repair and sell the rest to electronics hobbyists to buy the
  things we need. If you have out of date equipment around the
  house, please feel free to let us know! If you know of something
  that is in danger of being pushed off a dock, please give us a
  call! Contact us by sending e-mail to <a href=
  "mailto:staff@grex.org">staff@grex.org</a>.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="usefulstuff" id="usefulstuff"></a>Donations
  Especially Useful to GREX</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If you have old Sun equipment that you don't need, we'd love
  to hear about it. We're also always interested in things like PCs
  and Macs, SCSI disks, RAM chips, modems, commercial software, and
  printers.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="ecology" id="ecology"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>The Ecology of a Small System</h2>
  </div>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="maillimits" id="maillimits"></a>Mail Limits</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Because of our limited resources, we ask that you limit the
  amount of mail passing through your account (both incoming and
  outgoing) to 100K per day or less. Please also refrain from
  sending large files. If you have to send them, please break them
  into 100K chunks first and send those out, one per day. Also,
  please don't sign up for a mailing list unless you're sure you
  can keep up with the traffic and not let the mail accumulate in
  your inbox!</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="resources" id="resources"></a>Resources: The Final
  Frontier</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Grex is an all volunteer system, supported, maintained, and
  expanded with funds donated by members and friends. As with any
  group that relies on the beneficence of the public, sometimes we
  can't grow fast enough to keep up with demand. It's important to
  realize that we all share Grex's resources equally. When the
  resources run out, we also share equally in the hassles and the
  responsibilities to help solve the problem. Please don't keep
  large files in your home directory for more than a few days and
  please read and remove your mail regularly.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="whynoISP" id="whynoISP"></a>Why GREX Is not an
  Internet Service Provider (ISP)</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Our Internet link is currently one DSL line. This means that
  Grex isnt all that fast compared to the big guys that are well
  connected. While we're very grateful for the connection, the size
  of the link does require some restraint on everyone's part to
  avoid overtaxing it. Since lots of things use this link, like
  telnet, FTP, e-mail, etc., you shouldnt think of Grex as an
  Internet provider. Think of us instead as a conferencing system
  that has some Internet capabilities.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="connect" id="connect"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Off to a Good Start - Getting Connected to GREX</h2>
  </div>

  <p>There are two ways to log into Grex: by dialing into Grex's
  modem bank and by telnetting in over the Internet.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="dialin" id="dialin"></a>Dialing in to GREX</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Dialing in to Grex requires comparatively little
  equipment.<br />
  You need:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>a computer or terminal</li>

    <li>a modem</li>

    <li>working telephone service</li>

    <li>a communication package such as ProComm, Telix, Kermit, or
    the Windows Terminal program.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>Of course, it can't hurt to have some documentation about
  using Grex, or a friend who's familiar with the system, too.</p>

  <p><strong>Setting Up Your Communication Parameters</strong><br />
  Almost any terminal program, on any computer, can connect to
  Grex. Refer to your documentation for the details of how your
  modem and communication program work.</p>

  <p>Next set your modem to the highest speed it will support, up
  to 14400 bps.</p>

  <p><strong>Dialing</strong><br />
  When you've set your communication parameters, you're ready to
  dial Grex. Tell your terminal program to dial<br /></p>

  <blockquote>
    (734) 761-3000
  </blockquote>

  <p>When your modem connects to Grex, you'll hear a whistling in
  several tones. When it finishes, you'll see a welcome message on
  the screen, followed by the prompt<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <p><tt>login:</tt></p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="telnet" id="telnet"></a>Using Telnet to Connect to
  GREX</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If your computer is already connected to the Internet through
  some other service, you can access Grex with a telnet program.
  Most of the time that means typing the command<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c9">
    <p><tt>telnet grex.org</tt></p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Or it might mean starting the telnet program and then telling
  it to open a connection to grex.org. If you connected
  correctly, you should see the same prompt as above:</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="loggingin" id="loggingin"></a>Logging in</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p><strong>*Note:</strong> If this is your first time on Grex,
  see <a href="#newuser">Creating a New Account</a>.</p>

  <p>Type your Grex login ID (the one selected when you ran the
  Newuser program) at the login prompt. For instance, if your login
  is waffles, type<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <p><tt>login: </tt><em>waffles</em></p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Next you'll be prompted for your password. If your password is
  pancakes, type<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    waffles's Password: <em>pancakes</em>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Grex won't show the letters you type here so that no one can
  learn your password by watching over your shoulder as you log
  in.</p>

  <p>Finally, Grex will show you the terminal type youve selected.
  If you're logging in from the same type of computer as usual,
  just press the enter key; otherwise type in the appropriate
  terminal type.</p>

  <p><strong>*Note:</strong> If you always log in from the same
  type of terminal, you can use the change program to tell Grex not
  to prompt you every time. See <a href="#changes">Changing Things
  About Your Login</a>.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="newuser" id="newuser"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Creating a New Account</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Creating an account on Grex is free. You don't have to send
  money or identification, you can create a new account and start
  conferencing during the same session!</p>

  <p>To create a new account, simply type<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <p><tt>login: </tt><em>newuser</em></p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>The Grex Newuser program will tell you something about the
  system, then will ask you a series of questions. This booklet
  contains the information you'll need to answer the hard
  questions.</p>

  <p>In answering the personal questions, keep in mind that 1)
  creating a new account doesnt obligate you to anything, ever and
  2) you'll decide whether to let everyone see the information you
  entered. If you put the privacy switch on, only staff will see
  your information. (Staff won't divulge your private information
  without a court order.)</p>

  <p>But, of course, if you don't want to answer any personal
  questions, that's OK too. We do recommend, however, that you give
  some contact information to Newuser, such as an alternate e-mail
  address or a physical address. That way, if you ever forget your
  password, you can send the Grex staff mail from your other
  address, and they will reset the password for you.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="termtype" id="termtype"></a>Finding Your Terminal
  Type</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>The computer and communications software you use to access
  Grex are together called your terminal. UNIX systems can
  theoretically be accessed by many users using very different
  computers and communication software. For this reason Grex and
  systems like it support a wide variety of terminal types. This,
  as you might expect, causes some confusion.</p>

  <p>There are some programs on Grex that need to know how to talk
  to your terminal, which means you can't use them if you don't
  know your terminal type. That makes it worth figuring it out what
  terminal type you are using.</p>

  <p><strong>*Note:</strong> You don't have to know your terminal
  type to use Grex, but Grex will work better for you if you
  do.</p>

  <p>Usually the terminal type is explained in the communication
  program documentation under Terminal Emulation. Fortunately,
  almost all communication programs these days have the ability to
  look like a vt100 terminal (that's the name of a terminal
  standard developed by Digital Corporation), so if you aren't sure
  try that. If you find out that you made the wrong choice in the
  Newuser program, don't worry. You can change it later. (Computers
  are wonderful that way!)</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="shells" id="shells"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Selecting a Shell</h2>
  </div>

  <p>A shell is a UNIX program which gets run as soon as you log
  in, and keeps running until you log off. All other programs that
  you run are launched from within your shell. It's kind of like a
  stage on which everything happens.</p>

  <p>Grex offers a number of different shells for you to choose
  from. Which one you should choose depends on how familiar you are
  with UNIX and how you want to use Grex.</p>

  <ul>
    <li><h3>The Menu Shell</h3><br />
    The menu shell is very popular because it lets you choose most
    of Grex's options from a simple menu. It doesn't explain what
    those options mean, but if you've had some experience with
    conferencing systems this is your best bet.</li>

    <li><h3>The Lynx Shell</h3><br />
    The Lynx shell gives you the most information and takes the
    guess work out of using Grex. If you're completely unfamiliar
    with conferencing systems, UNIX, and the Internet, this is
    probably your best bet. It does take a certain amount of
    patience, though, because there is a lot of information and it
    continues to show up whether you need it or not.</li>

    <li><h3>The BBS Shell</h3><br />
    If you're familiar with conferencing systems and you know
    generally what you want to do here on Grex, whether it's
    conferencing, e-mail, chatting, or something else, you may find
    the BBS shell the easiest way to go. It requires that you learn
    a few simple commands, but it's fast and flexible. For a BBS
    Tipsheet, send a SASE to Grex INFO at the address listed in the
    <a href="#morehelp">Getting More Help</a> section .</li>

    <li><h3>Programmer Shells</h3> (csh, zsh, ksh, sh, tcsh, and
    bash)<br />
    If you're familiar with UNIX and command-line interfaces and
    you want the full power of a UNIX system available to you when
    you're using Grex, you may find the C shell (csh), or one of
    the other UNIX shells mentioned above, the most efficient way
    to go. They require that you know standard UNIX commands, but
    they are quick and flexible. For a C shell Tipsheet, send a
    SASE to Grex INFO at the address listed in the <a href=
    "#morehelp">Getting More Help</a> section.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="changes" id="changes"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Changing Things about your Login</h2>
  </div>

  <p>When you run the Grex Newuser program, you make a number of
  decisions about things like what character would be used for
  backspace, which editor to use, etc.</p>

  <p>If you've decided that something isn't quite right for you and
  you'd like to change it, the change program will help you fix
  things. From inside PicoSpan, type:<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c9">
    !change
  </blockquote><br />
  or, from another shell, type:<br />

  <blockquote class="c9">
    change
  </blockquote>

  <p>The change program is completely menu driven and will prompt
  you each step of the way. It does all the hard stuff for you.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="morehelp" id="morehelp"><span class="c3">Table
  of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Getting More Help</h2>
  </div>

  <p>There are a number of good ways to get answers to your Grexish
  questions or problems. The first thing you might try is
  typing</p>

  <blockquote class="c9">
    help
  </blockquote>(or possibly

  <blockquote class="c9">
    !help
  </blockquote>) wherever you happen to be. If that doesn't tell
  you what you need to know, try one of these other options.

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="infoconf" id="infoconf"></a>The Info Conference</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>One of the best ways to get answers is to join the info
  conference, where people have been asking and answering questions
  throughout Grex's existence. If you don't find the answer to your
  question there, you can always post it and check back in a couple
  of hours.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="helpers" id="helpers"></a>GREX On-Line Helpers</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If you have an urgent question, you can type:<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c9">
    write help
  </blockquote>

  <p>That notifies a Grex helper (if one is logged on) that you
  have a question. Please wait several minutes for a response,
  since the helper may be helping someone else or in the middle of
  an uninterruptible process when you call.</p>

  <p>A Grex helper is just a more experienced user who has agreed
  to answer basic Grex questions. Not every helper will know the
  answer to every question, and helpers don't have any capabilities
  (other than knowledge) that you don't have.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="trouble" id="trouble"></a>The Trouble Login</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If you have trouble logging in, you can log in as trouble.
  That login automatically sends mail to the people who can help
  you straighten out account problems. Be sure to give us the
  information about your account and how we can reach you. (Staff
  clairvoyance is a very limited resource.)</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="moredocs" id="moredocs"></a>More Documentation</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If there's a document you want, or you need more information
  about a specific topic, send a request to<br />
  <a href=
  "mailto:comments@grex.org">comments@grex.org</a> or
  mail your request to:<br />
  <em>Cyberspace Communications<br />
  P.O. Box 4432<br />
  Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106</em></p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="confs" id="confs"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Wandering through the Conferences: the Real GREX!</h2>
  </div>

  <p>While it's true that Grex has many services to offer,
  conferencing is the heart of the system. Without our conferences,
  we'd be little more than another file stop on the information
  highway. You'll find more than 100 conferences on Grex, with
  topics ranging from hobbies to public issues, from computers and
  games to life roles, with new conferences starting
  frequently.</p>

  <p>So, what is computer conferencing? It's a way of letting a
  group of people talk to each other over time, with the computer
  acting as a scribe, keeping track of all that has been said. At
  any point, any participant in a conference can go back and see
  everything that has been discussed since the last restart.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="lingo" id="lingo"></a>Terminology</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>A <em>conference</em> is a general area for discussion of
  related topics. (You may have heard the term <em>forum</em> used
  elsewhere to describe what we call a conference on Grex.) For
  example the kitchen conference is where people talk about food,
  cooking and restaurants. In the micros conference the topic is
  microcomputers. The coop conference is where you can learn more
  about how Grex is run and participate in the decision making
  process. And the smalls conference is dedicated to conversation
  about living with and raising children.</p>

  <p>Each conference consists of <em>items</em>, which anyone in the
  conference can enter. An item is a topic for conversation related
  to the conference subject. For instance, in the smalls conference
  you might find items about toilet training, schools, and cute
  remarks the little shavers make. You might think of an item as a
  comment you've written on a piece of paper, and stuck on a
  bulletin board or kiosk in a busy place. As people wander by,
  they can read your item. After reading it, they can add a comment
  or <em>response</em> to the bottom of the page.</p>

  <p>Over time, an item might have many responses and new
  conversations (called <em>drift</em>) may evolve from the original
  item; some popular items have hundreds of responses. Interaction
  between the participants of the conference spurs further
  discussion and brings up new points, which may spin off into new
  items...or not.</p>

  <p>So, to summarize the terminology: A <em>conference</em> is a
  place where people discuss a particular topic, such as cooking or
  children. Each conference consists of <em>items</em>, each of which
  is a discussion. Items may have any number of <em>responses</em>,
  entered by any number of people.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="confstart" id="confstart"><span class=
  "c3">Table of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Getting into the Conferencing System</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Grex's conferences can now be accessed in two different ways:
  through PicoSpan and through Backtalk. PicoSpan is a program
  written by Grex founder Marcus Watts in 1984, and it's the
  easiest thing to use when you're already logged on to Grex.
  Backtalk was written by Grex staffers Jan Wolter and Steve Weiss
  in 1996-98, and it operates through the World Wide Web. If you
  have access to the web, you can check out Backtalk by going to
  <a href="http://www.grex.org">www.grex.org</a> and
  following a few links.</p>

  <p>Since this handbook is mainly about what you do when you're
  logged in to Grex, it will focus on PicoSpan. First, getting into
  it:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>If You Use the Menu Shell:<br />
      Select

      <blockquote class="c7">
        B
      </blockquote>for BBS.
    </li>

    <li>If You Use the Lynx Shell:<br />
      From the initial screen, choose

      <blockquote class="c7">
        Grex Activities Menu
      </blockquote>followed by

      <blockquote class="c7">
        Computer conferencing
      </blockquote>.
    </li>

    <li>If You Use the BBS Shell:<br />
      If you selected the BBS shell when you created your account,
      you should see the<br />

      <blockquote class="c7">
        Ok:
      </blockquote><br />
      prompt as soon as you log in to Grex. That means you're
      already in PicoSpan.
    </li>

    <li>If You Use One of the Programmer Shells:<br />
      To get into the PicoSpan conferencing system from another
      shell, type:<br />

      <blockquote class="c9">
        bbs
      </blockquote><br />
      at your shell's prompt.
    </li>
  </ul>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="conftips" id="conftips"><span class="c3">Table
  of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Using the Conferencing System</h2>
  </div>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confprompts" id="confprompts"></a>Prompts</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>First things first. The two basic prompts that PicoSpan gives
  you are:<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    Ok:
  </blockquote><br />
  which means that you are reading a conference but not a specific
  item, and<br />

  <blockquote class="c7">
    Respond or pass?
  </blockquote><br />
  which you see after you have just read an item.

  <p><strong>*Note:</strong> Your prompts may differ slightly from
  the above. For instance, they may include a few lines of
  explanatory text or mention more possible actions. Dont let that
  throw you - all the examples in this handbook still apply.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confselect" id="confselect"></a>Selecting a
  Conference</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>When you begin conferencing for the first time, you will
  automatically start out in the agora conference. Agora is the
  main meeting hall on Grex, through which virtually everyone
  passes at one time or another. Almost any subject might come up
  in here so you'll probably find something there that interests
  you.</p>

  <p>Many people never go any farther than agora, but there are
  lots of other choices! To see an updated list of all the
  conferences, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>help conf</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>You'll be presented with a list of conferences sorted by
  subject. If you'd like to look in on, say, the kitchen
  conference, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>join kitchen</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>The first time you do that you'll get a message saying</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">You are not a member of /bbs/kitchen2. Do you
    wish to Join, quit, or help?</span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Type <strong><span class="c10"><em>J</em></span></strong> to join the
  conference.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confread" id="confread"></a>Reading a
  Conference</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Once you've found a conference you're interested in, you
  really only need to know a few commands to get started using
  PicoSpan. The commands are <strong><em>browse, read,</em></strong> and
  <strong><em>respond</em></strong>.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confitemlist" id="confitemlist"></a>Seeing a List of
  Items</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>The browse command presents a list of all the items in the
  conference. It will display the item name and the number that
  identifies that item to the system.</p>

  <p>Once you enter a conference, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>browse</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>A list of the items available will scroll across your screen.
  Note the numbers of any items that interest you.</p>

  <p><strong>*Note:</strong> Many PicoSpan commands can be
  abbreviated. For instance, <strong><em>browse</em></strong> can be
  abbreviated as <strong><em>b</em></strong> . We won't discuss all the
  abbreviations here, but you may want to guess at them to save
  yourself some keystrokes.</p>

  <p>If you've been in a conference before and want to see which
  items have changed since your last visit, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>browse new</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confitemread" id="confitemread"></a>Reading Specific
  Items</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Once you've found an item that interests you, the read command
  shows you the text of a particular item. If you don't specify an
  item number, PicoSpan will show all the items that you haven't
  read yet. (Not a good idea until you've gotten familiar with a
  conference.)</p>

  <p>To read, say, item 5, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>read 5</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>If you want to read several items, you can list all of them
  separated by a single space and they will come up in the order
  you listed them. So to read items 1, 7 and 4 in that order,
  type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>read 1 7 4</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confnewread" id="confnewread"></a>Reading New Items
  in a Conference</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Once you've been reading a conference for a while, you might
  want to read everything anyone has said there since you last
  checked in.</p>

  <p>To read all the new responses in a conference, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>read new</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>To read all new responses in items 1, 7, and 4, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>read 1 7 4 new</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confresp" id="confresp"></a>Responding to an
  Interesting Item</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>When you've finished reading an item, you may decide that you
  want to make a comment about the subject under discussion.</p>

  <p>PicoSpan will automatically ask if you want to respond or
  pass. To respond to the item, enter:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Respond or pass? <em>r</em></span>
  </blockquote>Then type in the text of your response. When you're
  done, type <strong>Ctrl-D</strong> or place a period on a line by itself
  and hit enter.

  <p>To pass on to the next item without responding, enter:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Respond or pass? <em>p</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>(Actually, if you just hit the enter key without typing a
  command, thats the same as typing p.) If you are interested in
  responding to an item, but would rather do it later, you can
  type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Respond or pass? <em>postpone</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>The item will show up again the next time you read new
  responses.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confviewresp" id="confviewresp"></a>Viewing
  Particular Responses</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Responses, like items, all have numbers. Because a single item
  can have hundreds of responses, you may want to go back and view
  a few of them at a time without rereading the whole item. To
  view, say, response number 50, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Respond or pass? <em>only 50</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>To view all the responses since response 34, simply type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Respond or pass? <em>34</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>To view the original text of the item, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Respond or pass? <em>only 0</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>To see the title of the item, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Respond or pass? <em>header</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confenter" id="confenter"></a>Entering a New
  Item</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Once you've been around a while, you'll very likely want to
  start a new item of your own to discuss something that no one has
  brought up yet.</p>

  <p>To enter a brand new item:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>enter</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>PicoSpan will then ask you for the text of the item and its
  title.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="confforget" id="confforget"></a>Forgetting a Boring
  or Annoying Item</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>The forget command lets you tell PicoSpan that you don't want
  to follow an individual item. When the topic of an item doesn't
  interest you or you find something irritating about the drift of
  the conversation, you can easily dismiss the item from the list
  of those you'll read in the future. (So the next time you do a
  read new or a browse, it won't show up even if it has new
  responses.)</p>

  <p>To forget an item you have just read, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Respond or pass? <em>forget</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="email" id="email"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Getting The Hang Of E-Mail</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Using e-mail, you can: get to know people around the world,
  get back in touch with friends and family you haven't seen in far
  too long, and keep up to date on plans with your local
  friends.</p>

  <p>E-mail here on Grex won't cost you anything, so feel free to
  send and receive lots of messages -- only, please, keep them
  reasonably small. We do have a limited amount of bandwidth to
  serve the more than 3000 users who log in each day.</p>

  <p>So, how do you get started using e-mail? The first step is to
  collect some e-mail addresses for people you want to send mail
  to, and to give your e-mail address to people you want to hear
  from.</p>

  <p>Your e-mail address here is yourloginid@grex.org. In
  other words, if your login on Grex is <strong>tina</strong>, your address
  is: <strong>tina@grex.org</strong></p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="emailer" id="emailer"></a>Selecting a Mailer</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Grex offers several programs to allow you to send and receive
  mail. The only difference is in the way you use the program to
  read and send messages. Grex transmits all e-mail the same way,
  so that it will be compatible with other systems on the
  Internet.</p>

  <ul>
    <li>
      <h3>Pine</h3><br />
      Pine is a simple, menu driven mailer. Many people who are
      used to using a mouse prefer this mailer. (Its main drawback
      is that it can be quite slow when Grex is busy.) You need to
      have your terminal type set correctly to use Pine. To run
      Pine, type:

      <blockquote class="c7">
        <span class="c10">Ok: <em>pine</em></span>
      </blockquote>
    </li>

    <li>
      <h3>Elm</h3><br />
      Elm is also a simple, menu driven mailer. It's similar in
      concept to Pine, but it's been around longer and the details
      of how it works are a bit different. Elm, like Pine, requires
      that your terminal type be set correctly. To run Elm, type:

      <blockquote class="c7">
        <span class="c10">Ok: <em>elm</em></span>
      </blockquote>
    </li>

    <li>
      <h3>UNIX Mail</h3><br />
      The UNIX Mail mailer will work on any terminal. It's a
      command line mailer, so it's a bit trickier to get used to,
      but once you get the hang of it, it's also faster to use and
      less of a strain on Grex's resources than the other two. To
      run Mail, type:

      <blockquote class="c7">
        <span class="c10">Ok: <em>!mail</em></span>
      </blockquote>
    </li>
  </ul>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="party" id="party"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Party</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Party is a very popular program on Grex which allows users to
  have conversations in real time. It's similar to what are called
  chat rooms on the Internet.</p>

  <p>You enter Party by typing:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>party</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>If other people are already there (as is almost always the
  case), very soon you will start to see messages from them
  appearing on your screen. You can respond by simply typing what
  you want to say. Hit the Enter key to send the text to
  everyone.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="noises" id="noises"></a>Noises</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Occasionally you may see text appear on your screen which
  looks like:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">&lt;robh hugs steve&gt;</span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>That is called a noise. Party has a table of many noises you
  can make. You make a noise by typing the noise's name followed by
  any parameters it takes. To make the noise above, for instance,
  robh typed:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10"><em>/hug steve</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>To see a table of all the noises you can make, just enter a
  slash (<strong>/</strong>) by itself. But be warned, the list is over a
  thousand lines long. There is a catch all noise called emote
  which you may want to know about, because it lets you use it
  however you want. For instance, if robh types:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10"><em>/emote quacks like a duck</em></span>
  </blockquote>everyone will see:

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">&lt;robh quacks like a duck&gt;</span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="www" id="www"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>The World Wide Web</h2>
  </div>

  <p>The popularity of the World Wide Web is what has driven the
  Internet boom of the 1990s. That boom promises to become one of
  the most significant changes in our society begun in the
  twentieth century.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="lynx" id="lynx"></a>Accessing the Web through
  Lynx</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Grex provides access to the textual portions of the Web
  through a browser called Lynx. We would like to be able to show
  you pictures too, but our link just can't handle that much
  traffic.</p>

  <p>To run Lynx, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>!lynx</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>You will see a web page on Grex which will help you to get
  started. There is lots of help for Lynx available online, but
  here are a few tips:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>If you know the address of a web page you want to visit,
    type <strong><span class="c10"><em>g</em></span></strong> followed by the
    address.</li>

    <li>The up and down arrow keys are used for moving the cursor
    around within a page. Use them to highlight a link you want to
    follow and press Enter to go there.</li>

    <li>The left and right arrow keys move you backward and forward
    within the list of pages you have visited.</li>

    <li>Hit <strong><span class="c10"><em>?</em></span></strong> for help.</li>

    <li>If your screen gets messed up for some reason, you can have
    Lynx redraw it by hitting <strong>Ctrl-R</strong>.</li>

    <li>Hit <strong><span class="c10"><em>q</em></span></strong> to quit out of
    Lynx.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="homepage" id="homepage"></a>Making Your Own Home
  Page on GREX</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If you'd like to create your own little corner of the Web you
  can do it on Grex. Its not quite as simple as typing in a text
  document; you will need to know HTML (Hypertext Markup Language).
  Many references are available both on the Web and in bookstores
  on HTML. And of course, you can't store pictures or multimedia
  files on Grex, but your page can contain references to them if
  they are elsewhere.</p>

  <p>To make your own homepage on Grex, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>!mkhomepage</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>You'll get a menu which lets you choose to create a new
  homepage or edit an old one, and also gives you more information.
  If you create a new one, it will be a file called index.html in a
  subdirectory of your home directory called www. The address
  people use to access your page depends on your user ID; for
  instance, if you login as <strong>janc</strong>, then your home page is:
  <strong>http://www.grex.org/~janc</strong></p>

  <p>If you'd like to see the list of frequently asked questions
  about Grex web pages, there is a link to it on the first page you
  see when you run Lynx.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="mathom" id="mathom"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Peek into Your Mathom Closet</h2>
  </div>

  <p>This is a quote from <em>The Fellowship of the Ring</em> by
  J.R.R. Tolkien:</p>

  <blockquote class="c11">
    So, though there was still some store of weapons in the Shire,
    these were used mostly as trophies, hanging above hearths or on
    walls, or gathered into the museum at Michel Delving. The
    Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbits had no
    immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away, they
    called a mathom. Their dwellings were apt to become rather
    crowded with mathoms, and many of the presents that passed from
    hand to hand were of that sort.
  </blockquote>

  <p>So mathom, strictly speaking, refers to that class of item
  that while useless, is too delightful to throw away. Most people
  have a closet somewhere in the house where at least a few pieces
  hide.</p>

  <p>Here on Grex, mathom is also a program that allows you to
  create text gifts for the people you like. Larry Kestenbaum
  (polygon) suggested that we adopt the idea here on Grex, and
  Valerie Mates (valerie) created the program.</p>

  <p>To run the Mathom program, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>mathom</em></span>
  </blockquote>at any PicoSpan prompt. The program is pretty much
  self-explanatory. The commands may all be abbreviated to one
  letter. So for instance, when you see the prompt:

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Look (at your mathom), Create (new mathom),
    Someone (else's mathom to look at), Who (has mathom?), Help, or
    Exit?</span>
  </blockquote>that means you can enter <strong><span class=
  "c10"><em>L</em></span></strong> to look at your mathom, <strong><span class=
  "c10"><em>C</em></span></strong> to create a new mathom, etc.

  <p>The first time someone gives you a mathom, the program will
  send you mail to let you know about it. Once you have mathom
  (either because you created it or because someone gave it to
  you), you can look at it or give it away.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="finger" id="finger"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Finger</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Recall that when you create a Grex account through the Newuser
  program, you are asked for some information about yourself. Your
  answers to those questions are stored in a file in your home
  directory called .plan.</p>

  <p>You can see someone's .plan by using the finger command. At a
  PicoSpan prompt, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>finger mta</em></span>
  </blockquote>to see mta's .plan. (You'll also see information
  about when mta last logged on, and a few other things.) If you
  enter finger with no parameters:

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>finger</em></span>
  </blockquote>you'll get a list of everyone who's on Grex right
  now.

  <p>Note that finger is a standard Internet protocol, so if you
  want them to, everyone on the Net can see what's in your .plan;
  or you can set it so that it is completely private. You can
  switch back and forth between these settings using the change
  program.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="chatting" id="chatting"><span class="c3">Table
  of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Going One-on-One: Using Chat, Write, Talk, and Tel</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Chat, Write, Talk, and Tel are all programs that let you
  converse with another user one-on-one in real time. This can be a
  good way to make arrangements on-line to meet with friends for
  dinner later, or to get to know another user more personally,
  even though you live thousands of miles apart.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="chat" id="chat"></a>Chat and Write</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Chat and Write are essentially the same program with different
  options. Both allow one user on Grex to type text which then
  appears on another user's terminal, and vice-versa. Chat passes
  characters as they arrive, one character at a time, and Write
  passes them one line at a time.</p>

  <p>To use Chat to talk to user aruba, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>chat aruba</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>From now on, everything you type will appear on aruba's
  screen. This could potentially be quite confusing and annoying to
  the recipient, so there are a few rules of ettiquette which have
  been established to make Chat and Write work more smoothly:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>The person initiating the call waits for the other person
    to respond before saying anything.</li>

    <li>To signal that it's the other persons turn to type, end
    your transmission with an <strong><span class=
    "c10"><em>o</em></span></strong> (for over) on its own line.</li>

    <li>Wait for the other person to signal with an <strong><span class=
    "c10"><em>o</em></span></strong> that it's your turn to type.</li>

    <li>When you want to end the conversation, type <strong><span class=
    "c10"><em>oo?</em></span></strong> (for over and out) on a line by
    itself. The other person will respond with <strong><span class=
    "c10"><em>oo</em></span></strong> if he or she is ready to sign
    off.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>To exit Chat or Write, type <strong>Ctrl-D</strong>.</p>

  <p>When someone taps you to talk using Chat or Write, youll see a
  line on your screen that looks like:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">message from popcorn on ttyq8 at
    20:47...</span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Respond with:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>write</em></span>
  </blockquote>or

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>chat</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="talk" id="talk"></a>Talk</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Talk is the most sophisticated of the conversational programs.
  It draws a horizontal line halfway down your screen. Whatever you
  type appears on the top half of the screen, and whatever the
  other person types appears on the bottom. That keeps the text
  from getting tangled.</p>

  <p>You must have your terminal type set correctly for Talk to
  work. If you get all the text as a single column down the left
  side of your screen, it means your terminal type is set up
  incorrectly.</p>

  <p>When someone taps you to talk using the Talk program, you'll
  see something like:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <p><span class="c10">Message from Talk_Daemon@grex.org
    at 13:23 ...<br />
    talk: connection requested by aruba@grex.org.<br />
    talk: respond with: talk aruba@grex.org</span></p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Actually all you need to type to respond is:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>talk aruba</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>The reason that the Talk program gave you a full Internet
  address is that Talk (unlike Chat and Write) is capable of
  connecting you to people on other machines besides Grex.</p>

  <p>To exit talk press your interrupt character (usually
  <strong>Ctrl-C</strong>).</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="tel" id="tel"></a>Tel</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>Tel is short for telegram, and it's a program you can use to
  send a quick message to someone else on Grex. To send a message
  to aruba, type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>!tel aruba</em></span>
  </blockquote>Then enter your text:

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Telegram to aruba on ttyrf...<br />
    Msg: <em>How's it going?</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>The message you typed will then appear on aruba's screen.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="mesgN" id="mesgN"></a>Preventing People from Writing
  to You</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If you don't want anyone to tap you for a one-to-one
  conversation right now, you can close the chat door by going to
  any PicoSpan prompt and typing:<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>mesg n</em></span>
  </blockquote><br />

  <p>That will tell people who try to chat with you using Chat,
  Write, Talk, or Tel that you're busy right now and not accepting
  messages. If you decide that you're open to conversation later in
  your session, you can re-open the chat door by typing:<br /></p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>mesg y</em></span>
  </blockquote><br />

  <p>It's possible to be more selective about who is allowed to
  chat you and who isn't. The change program allows you to set
  those options.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="textfiles" id="textfiles"><span class=
  "c3">Table of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Text Files and Editors</h2>
  </div>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="homedir" id="homedir"></a>Your Home Directory</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>When someone creates a new account on Grex, a place is set
  aside for that account's files. This is called the account's
  <strong>home directory</strong>. Certain programs store information in
  files there, and on top of that you can put any files you want in
  your home directory, though we ask that you keep your total disk
  usage to under 1 megabyte.</p>

  <p>Most files on UNIX systems are text files, meaning they
  contain only printable characters (letters, numbers, and
  punctuation) and a few formatting characters (end-of-line markers
  and tabs) but no fancy formatting stuff. Occasionally you may
  want to create or modify text files in your home directory - such
  as the .plan file mentioned in the section on <a href=
  "#finger">Finger</a>.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="editors" id="editors"></a>Editors</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>An editor program allows you to change text files and create
  new ones. Its also useful if you enter a long response in the
  Mail program or in PicoSpan, and then realize you made a mistake
  on the first line and need to go back and change it.</p>

  <p>Most editors show you the full text of a file and allow you to
  move around in your text and to cut and paste blocks of text in
  different places. An editor is like a word processor, but without
  a lot of formatting commands (like boldface and italics) which
  don't apply to text files. Grex offers a number of different
  editors. Which one you should use should depend on what you're
  used to and how much fancy stuff you want to do.</p>

  <ul>
    <li>
      <h3>Nano</h3><br />
      Nano is probably the best bet for a novice Grex user. It's
      designed to fit well with the Pine mailer (it was written by
      the same people), so if you selected Pine, you'll want to use
      Nano for a consistent interface. To use Nano to edit a file
      called foo, type:

      <blockquote class="c7">
        <span class="c10">Ok: <em>nano foo</em></span>
      </blockquote>

      <p>Nano shows you a list of commands you can type at the
      bottom of the screen, which makes it easy to get started
      without learning a lot of keystrokes first. The only
      drawbacks to using it are that it's a bit slow and you can't
      do anything fancy with it. But it's usually fast enough, and
      you usually don't need to do anything fancy.</p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <h3>Joe</h3><br />
      Joe is another simple editor you may want to try - it is
      similar to Wordstar. Type:

      <blockquote class="c7">
        <span class="c10">Ok: <em>joe foo</em></span>
      </blockquote>to edit the file foo with Joe. You can get it to
      show you a list of commands right on the screen by typing
      <strong>Ctrl-K</strong> followed by <strong><span class=
      "c10"><em>h</em></span></strong>.
    </li>

    <li><h3>vi, emacs, and the rest</h3><br />
    If you are an experienced UNIX user, you can choose one of the
    standard UNIX editors. These are not for the timid,
    though.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="editorinvoke" id="editorinvoke"></a>Using an Editor
  from within PicoSpan or Mail</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>In order to use an editor from within PicoSpan or Mail or
  another program, you must first tell the system what editor you
  prefer. Type:</p>

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">Ok: <em>!change</em></span>
  </blockquote>and follow the prompts to do that. Then if you're
  typing a response in PicoSpan and would like to edit it in your
  editor, enter a colon on a line by itself:

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">&gt;<em>:</em></span>
  </blockquote>and PicoSpan will put you in your editor. To do the
  same thing in Mail, type:

  <blockquote class="c7">
    <span class="c10">&amp; <em>~v</em></span>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="updownload" id="updownload"><span class=
  "c3">Table of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Uploading and Downloading Files</h2>
  </div>

  <p>There are times when you may want to copy a file that is
  currently on Grex onto your home computer, or vice-versa. Knowing
  how to do that is a very useful skill, because it allows you to
  compose long messages offline, to save text you like on your home
  computer (so you need not log onto Grex to get to it), and even
  to exchange personal computer programs with other users.</p>

  <p>Copying a file from Grex to your home computer is called
  downloading the file. (Think of Grex as being upstairs, and your
  PC as being downstairs.) Sending files the other way is called
  uploading.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="dialupfiles" id="dialupfiles"></a>Transferring Files
  over a Dial-up Connection</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>There are several protocols used for transferring files over a
  dial-up connection.</p>

  <p>The ones Grex supports are <strong>Kermit, X-Modem, Y-Modem,</strong>
  and <strong>Z-Modem</strong>. Which protocol you use depends on what your
  communications software will support. Check your documentation
  for references to transferring files.</p>

  <h3><strong>Downloading</strong> over a Dial-up Connection</h3><br />
  <p>Downloading a file is a two-step process. First decide what
  protocol you are using, and be sure you know the filename. We'll
  suppose the file is called waffles.</p>

  <blockquote>
    1. First tell Grex to send the file. How you do this depends on
    the protocol you're using:

    <blockquote>
      <table>
        <tr>
          <td>Kermit:</td>

          <td><span class="c10"><strong>Ok: <em>!kermit -s
          waffles</em></strong></span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>X-Modem:</td>

          <td><span class="c10"><strong>Ok: <em>!sx
          waffles</em></strong></span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>Y-Modem:</td>

          <td><span class="c10"><strong>Ok: <em>!sy
          waffles</em></strong></span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>Z-Modem:</td>

          <td><span class="c10"><strong>Ok: <em>!sz
          waffles</em></strong></span></td>
        </tr>
      </table>
    </blockquote>2. As soon as you get a message that says the file
    is ready to be sent, tell your communications program to
    receive the file. How you do that depends on what program youre
    using; you'll have to read the documentation to find out.
  </blockquote>

  <h3><strong>Uploading</strong> over a Dial-up Connection</h3><br />
  <p>Uploading is also a two-step process. Decide what protocol you're
  using, then:</p>

  <blockquote>
    1. First tell Grex to receive the file. Depending on the
    protocol, you would type:

    <blockquote>
      <table>
        <tr>
          <td>Kermit:</td>

          <td><span class="c10"><strong>Ok: <em>!kermit
          -r</em></strong></span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>X-Modem:</td>

          <td><span class="c10"><strong>Ok: <em>!rx</em></strong></span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>Y-Modem:</td>

          <td><span class="c10"><strong>Ok: <em>!ry</em></strong></span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>Z-Modem:</td>

          <td><span class="c10"><strong>Ok: <em>!rz</em></strong></span></td>
        </tr>
      </table>
    </blockquote>2. After you get a message that says Grex is ready
    to receive, go to your communications program and tell it to
    send the file. Again, how you do that depends on your program,
    so check the documentation.
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>

  <h3><a name="ftp" id="ftp"></a>FTP</h3>
  <hr class="c5" width="300" />

  <p>If you connect to Grex over the Internet using telnet, the
  best way to transfer files to your home computer is by using FTP.
  FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol, and you'll need an FTP
  program on your home computer to transfer files. How it works
  will depend on just which program you have, but basically you
  want to tell it to open a connection to <strong>grex.org</strong>,
  then give it your login ID and password.</p>

  <p>After you're connected, if you have a graphical interface you
  should be able to drag and drop the files you want to move. If
  you have a command-line interface (such as the one that comes
  with Windows 95), the commands are <strong>get</strong> to get a file from
  Grex and <strong>put</strong> to put a file onto Grex.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="unix" id="unix"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>UNIX (Whats That?)</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Grex runs a version of the UNIX operating system called SunOS
  4.1.4. SunOS is the underlying software system that lets all the
  programs you use (such as PicoSpan, Mail, etc.) run, much as DOS,
  Mac OS, and Windows 95 allow programs to run on home computers.
  There are many versions of UNIX in existence; ours originally
  came from Sun Microsystems Inc., the makers of the Sun-4 computer
  Grex runs on now.</p>

  <p>Explaining the intricacies of UNIX is a formidable task, well
  beyond the scope of this handbook. But you are welcome to use
  Grex to learn as much as you can about it, studying the
  documentation online and asking lots of questions.</p>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="biblio" id="biblio"><span class="c3">Table of
  Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2>Bibliography</h2>
  </div>

  <p>Much of what you need to know to make full use of all GREX's
  facilities can be found in a good UNIX reference. The most of the
  rest can be found in a good Internet reference. We recommend you
  check out the local library! Here are a few places to start:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p><strong>Take me To Your Modem: a pocket guide to GREX</strong><br />
    Cyberspace Communications, 1993</p>

    <p><strong>UNIX for Dummies</strong> by John R. Levine<br />
    IDG Books Worldwide 1993</p>

    <p><strong>Internet for Dummies</strong> by John R. Levine<br />
    IDG Books Worldwide 1993</p>

    <p><strong>Zen and the Art of the Internet: A Beginner's Guide</strong>
    by Brendon P. Kehoe<br />
    Prentice Hall, 1993</p>

    <p><strong>The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic
    Frontier</strong> by Howard Rheingold<br />
    Addison-Wesley, 1993</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>&nbsp;</p>
  <hr noshade="noshade" />
  <a href="#" name="principles" id="principles"><span class=
  "c3">Table of Contents</span></a>

  <div class="c2">
    <h2 class="c12">The GREX Statement of Principles</h2>
  </div>

  <p>This system is intended to foster community education and the
  spiritual and intellectual enrichment of its users, through the
  peaceable interchange of ideas.</p>

  <p>The members of this system hope to attract a large, diverse,
  and mature group of thinking individuals and thereby to
  contribute to a better-informed citizenry.</p>

  <p>Governance of the system is based on cooperative principles,
  including open membership, democratic control, and nonprofit
  economics.</p>

  <p>This is an open-access system; the public is welcome. However,
  we encourage regular users to become members and help support the
  system financially. Voting on system policy matters is restricted
  to members.</p>

  <p>It should go without saying that the system is specifically
  NOT intended for any illegal purpose.</p>

  <p>Users are asked to be considerate of others, and are
  especially asked to make a point of setting a good example for
  those few who may from time to time fail to return the favor.</p>
</body>
</html>
