                             Wizard in Training

                        Your GREX Beginner's Handbook

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              Table of Contents

                                           * Getting into the Conferencing
                                             System
    * Janitorial Staff
                                           * Using the Conferencing System
    * A Bit of History                          o Prompts
                                                o Selecting a Conference
    * How GREX Works                            o Reading a Conference
                                                o Seeing a List of Items
    * Making Sense of This (Web)                o Reading Specific Items
      Booklet                                   o Reading New Items in a
         o Type Conventions                       Conference
         o A Note about !s                      o Responding to an
                                                  Interesting Item
    * The Psychology of Electronic              o Viewing Particular
      Communication                               Responses
         o Emoticons                            o Entering a New Item
                                                o Forgetting a Boring or
    * Netiquette: Social Lubricant in             Annoying Item
      Cyberspace
         o Flames                          * Getting The Hang Of E-Mail
         o Advertising                          o Selecting a Mailer

    * GREX Membership: What and Why        * Party
                                                o Noises
    * Donations: The Lifeblood of a
      Bottom Feeder                        * The World Wide Web
         o Donations Especially Useful          o Accessing the Web through
           to GREX                                Lynx
                                                o Making Your Own Home Page
    * The Ecology of a Small System               on GREX
         o Mail Limits
         o Resources: The Final            * Peek into Your Mathom Closet
           Frontier
         o Why GREX Isnt an Internet       * Finger
           Service Provider (ISP)
                                           * Going One-on-One: Using Chat,
    * Off to a Good Start - Getting          Write, Talk, and Tel
      Connected to GREX                         o Chat and Write
         o Dialing in to GREX                   o Talk
         o Using Telnet to Connect to           o Tel
           GREX                                 o Preventing People from
         o Logging in                             Writing to You

    * Creating a New Account               * Text Files and Editors
         o Finding Your Terminal Type           o Your Home Directory
                                                o Editors
    * Selecting a Shell                         o Using an Editor from
                                                  within PicoSpan or Mail
    * Changing Things about your Login
                                           * Uploading and Downloading
    * Getting More Help                      Files
         o The Info Conference                  o Transferring Files over a
         o GREX On-Line Helpers                   Dial-up Connection
         o The Trouble Login                    o FTP
         o More Documentation
                                           * UNIX (Whats That?)
    * Wandering through the
      Conferences: the Real GREX!          * Bibliography
         o Terminology
                                           * The GREX Statement of
                                             Principles



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              Janitorial Staff

The 2002 Cyberspace Communications Board of Directors:
        Eric Bassey (other) - Chair
        Anne Perry (mooncat) - Secretary
        Mark Conger (aruba) - Treasurer
        Mary Remmers (mary)
        STeve Andre' (steve)
        Greg Fleming (flem)
        Marcus Watts (mdw)
                E-mail the board at board@cyberspace.org

The Grex Staff:
        STeve Andre' (steve)            Charles Mitchell (arthurp)
        Mic Giansiracusa (spooked)      John Remmers (remmers)
        Steve Gibbard (scg)             Marcus Watts (mdw)
        Dan Gryniewicz (dang)           Jan Wolter (janc)
        Scott Helmke (scott)            Steve Weiss (srw)
        Valerie Mates (valerie)
                E-mail the staff at staff@cyberspace.org

Conference Administrators (cfadms):
        Walter Cramer  (i)              Valerie Mates (valerie)
        Scott Helmke (scott)            John Remmers (remmers)

Webmaster:
        Steve Weiss (srw)

Software Designers:
        Valerie Mates (valerie)         Mathom
        Mic Giansiracusa (spooked)      New Menus
        John Remmers (remmers)          Vote, Web Vote
        Marcus Watts (mdw)              PicoSpan, Newuser, Telnet Queue, Spam blocks, a bunch of other stuff
        Steve Weiss (srw)               Lynx Menu, Backtalk
        Jan Wolter (janc)               Party, Write, Mesg, Gate, Backtalk, Web Newuser

This handbook written by:
        Misti Tucker (mta)              Mark Conger (aruba)
With help from:
        STeve Andre' (steve)             Valerie Mates (valerie)
adapted for the Web by:
        Eric Bassey (other)



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              A Bit of History

Grex was conceived in 1990 by a dozen people with little more in common than
a love for computer conferencing. Over the course of several months, they
met once a week to discuss their ideas about how the ideal system might be
run, and to work out a common vision. The process wasn't always smooth; each
founder had very clear ideas and there were sometimes differences that were
very hard to resolve. They persevered and finally arrived at a consensus.

Once their vision for Grex was formed, they spent the next several months
working to pull the system together. Once they had collected the money and
equipment their new system would need just to open to the public, they
agreed amongst themselves that they would finance the system's operations
out of their own pockets for the first year.

On July 18, 1991, Grex opened its lines to the modeming public.

Grex got its start running on a donated Sun-2/170, with only 5 phone lines,
4 Meg of RAM, and 2 ancient 80 Meg Fujitsu SMD hard drives. It was housed in
the warehouse of a generous local business owner, Ken Ascher, for just the
cost of the electricity and telephones. NetMeg, owned and operated by Meg
Geddes, supplied the Internet mail feed.

Things have changed some since then. Grex is now living in its own
apartment, a 12' by 12' room in a building near downtown Ann Arbor. We're
running on a Sun-4/670 with 384MB of RAM, 31 gigabytes of disk and 7 dial-in
phone lines. Most important, Grex is now attached to the Internet by a
dedicated DSL connection!



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               How GREX Works

Cyberspace Communications, Inc., is a Michigan non-profit corporation.

Any user may become a member of Grex just by making a donation of $2 a month
or $18 a year to the system. The membership makes all major decisions about
the system's direction.

The Board of Directors, elected by the members of Grex, makes routine
administrative decisions. The Board normally meets once a month. Members
(and anyone else who's interested) are welcome to attend.

Daily operations of Grex are managed by an all volunteer staff, which is
responsible for keeping Grex up and running smoothly. The staff is appointed
by the board and is responsible for keeping Grex up and happy. It's a
thankless job that keeps them busy for hours every week. (Thanks, folks!)
Normally, the staff is represented at all board meetings.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                     Making Sense of This (Web) Booklet

There are a few things you'll need to understand to make sense of the
instructions in this (web) booklet.



Type Conventions
--------------------------------------

If I want you to type something,

     [it will look like this.]

So if you see:

     Ok: [chat]

it means, type the word chat where you see Ok: on the screen.



A Note about !s
--------------------------------------

There is a convention that many UNIX programs observe: when you want to run
one program from within another, you type a ! (pronounced bang) before the
command. Most of the examples shown in this booklet dont use a ! , but in
some cases (such as when you are at a menu prompt) you may need one. So in
general, if a command doesnt work right for you, try putting a ! in front of
it.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                 The Psychology of Electronic Communication

Communicating electronically is different from talking face to face or over
the telephone. Without the feedback of facial and vocal cues, it's easy to
misunderstand, especially because English is an inherently ambiguous
language.

Take the time to wordsmith your comments. When you remove the ambiguity, you
ensure that the hundreds of people who will read your words will understand
them as you meant them. That can make all the difference in the world,
especially since Grex has users coming in from all over the world, many of
whom speak English as a second or third language.

It's also a good idea to give other people the benefit of the doubt if they
say something that can be taken more than one way. As you become more
familiar to the Grex old-timers and more familiar with the verbal shorthand
we've developed, you'll find it becomes second nature.



Emoticons
--------------------------------------

One way to help keep your responses from being misinterpreted is to use
emoticons (sometimes called smileys) to help readers know what facial
expression to associate with your words. For instance, if you say something
in jest, it's a good idea to put a  :)  after it. If you're sad about something, 
use  :(  . If you want to wink at someone, use  ;)  . There are many other 
possibilities - don't hesitate to experiment.





  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                 Netiquette: Social Lubricant in Cyberspace

As with every community, Cyberspace has a system of norms that allows us to
get along in harmony most of the time. Various nooks have variations on the
norms, of course. An excellent Internet convention is to try to be generous
in interpreting what you read, but diplomatic and refined in what you say.



Flames
--------------------------------------

A flame is a personal attack on another user, usually in a public forum like
the conferences or Party. Public flame fests are unpleasant and make the
system a stressful place to hang out.

From time to time it's likely that someone will make a remark that makes you
really angry. When that happens, remember:

   * Take time to cool off before you respond.
   * If the remark was intentionally provocative, the best response is no
     response.
   * Respond to the idea and not the speaker.
   * If you feel you absolutely must make a personal remark, please take it
     to e-mail and keep it private.



Advertising
--------------------------------------

Grex is a not-for-profit organization. It is not a platform for serious
business transactions. (This applies to private individuals as well as
companies.) We do however have a classifieds conference specifically set up
to let people with something to peddle meet people who want to barter or
buy.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       GREX Membership: What and Why

Becoming a member of Grex is easy. You can type

    [ support ]

or sometimes

    [ !support ]

at almost any prompt to get more information.

But what is a Grex membership, and why should you bother? After all, Grex is
a free system.

Well, yes, you are free to use Grex, whether you're a member or not. But
when you make a donation and become a Grex member, you buy a little piece of
our collective. You become a part owner in an exciting social experiment.
You get a voice in the running of the system, and most important, you help
ensure that this valuable community resource can continue to be available to
everyone.

Grex is entirely supported by its users. No large corporations or government
agencies contribute any of the money needed to keep the system running. This
means Grex is really and truly a grass roots organization, and it has the
freedom to change in whatever directions its members would like. But it also
means that it is entirely dependent on the good will of its users. If enough
people don't commit to supporting Grex, it may go away.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                Donations: The Lifeblood of a Bottom Feeder

Without donations, Grex wouldn't exist today. We are always happy to accept
any computer equipment in danger of becoming boat anchors and door stops. We
use what we can to expand Grex. We repair and sell the rest to electronics
hobbyists to buy the things we need. If you have out of date equipment
around the house, please feel free to let us know! If you know of something
that is in danger of being pushed off a dock, please give us a call! Contact
us by sending e-mail to staff@cyberspace.org.



Donations Especially Useful to GREX
--------------------------------------

If you have old Sun equipment that you don't need, we'd love to hear about
it. We're also always interested in things like PCs and Macs, SCSI disks,
RAM chips, modems, commercial software, and printers.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       The Ecology of a Small System



Mail Limits
--------------------------------------

Because of our limited resources, we ask that you limit the amount of mail
passing through your account (both incoming and outgoing) to 100K per day or
less. Please also refrain from sending large files. If you have to send
them, please break them into 100K chunks first and send those out, one per
day. Also, please don't sign up for a mailing list unless you're sure you
can keep up with the traffic and not let the mail accumulate in your inbox!



Resources: The Final Frontier
--------------------------------------

Grex is an all volunteer system, supported, maintained, and expanded with
funds donated by members and friends. As with any group that relies on the
beneficence of the public, sometimes we can't grow fast enough to keep up
with demand. It's important to realize that we all share Grex's resources
equally. When the resources run out, we also share equally in the hassles
and the responsibilities to help solve the problem. Please don't keep large
files in your home directory for more than a few days and please read and
remove your mail regularly.



Why GREX Isnt an Internet Service Provider (ISP)
--------------------------------------

Our Internet link is currently one DSL line. This means that Grex isnt all
that fast compared to the big guys that are well connected. While we're very
grateful for the connection, the size of the link does require some
restraint on everyone's part to avoid overtaxing it. Since lots of things
use this link, like telnet, FTP, e-mail, etc., you shouldnt think of Grex as
an Internet provider. Think of us instead as a conferencing system that has
some Internet capabilities.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

              Off to a Good Start - Getting Connected to GREX

There are two ways to log into Grex: by dialing into Grex's modem bank and
by telnetting in over the Internet.



Dialing in to GREX
--------------------------------------

Dialing in to Grex requires comparatively little equipment.
You need:

   * a computer or terminal
   * a modem
   * working telephone service
   * a communication package such as ProComm, Telix, Kermit, or the Windows
     Terminal program.

Of course, it can't hurt to have some documentation about using Grex, or a
friend who's familiar with the system, too.

Setting Up Your Communication Parameters
Almost any terminal program, on any computer, can connect to Grex. Refer to
your documentation for the details of how your modem and communication
program work.

Next set your modem to the highest speed it will support, up to 14400 bps.

Dialing
When you've set your communication parameters, you're ready to dial Grex.
Tell your terminal program to dial

     (734) 761-3000

When your modem connects to Grex, you'll hear a whistling in several tones.
When it finishes, you'll see a welcome message on the screen, followed by
the prompt

     login:



Using Telnet to Connect to GREX
--------------------------------------

If your computer is already connected to the Internet through some other
service, you can access Grex with a telnet program. Most of the time that
means typing the command

    [ telnet cyberspace.org ]

Or it might mean starting the telnet program and then telling it to open a
connection to cyberspace.org. If you connected correctly, you should see the
same prompt as above:



Logging in
--------------------------------------

*Note: If this is your first time on Grex, see Creating a New Account.

Type your Grex login ID (the one selected when you ran the Newuser program)
at the login prompt. For instance, if your login is waffles, type

     grex.org login: [ waffles ]

Next you'll be prompted for your password. If your password is pancakes,
type

     waffles's Password: [ pancakes ]

Grex won't show the letters you type here so that no one can learn your
password by watching over your shoulder as you log in.

Finally, Grex will show you the terminal type youve selected. If you're
logging in from the same type of computer as usual, just press the enter
key; otherwise type in the appropriate terminal type.

*Note: If you always log in from the same type of terminal, you can use the
change program to tell Grex not to prompt you every time. See Changing
Things About Your Login.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Creating a New Account

Creating an account on Grex is free. You don't have to send money or
identification, you can create a new account and start conferencing during
the same session!

To create a new account, simply type

     grex.org login: [ newuser ]

The Grex Newuser program will tell you something about the system, then will
ask you a series of questions. This booklet contains the information you'll
need to answer the hard questions.

In answering the personal questions, keep in mind that 1) creating a new
account doesnt obligate you to anything, ever and 2) you'll decide whether
to let everyone see the information you entered. If you put the privacy
switch on, only staff will see your information. (Staff won't divulge your
private information without a court order.)

But, of course, if you don't want to answer any personal questions, that's
OK too. We do recommend, however, that you give some contact information to
Newuser, such as an alternate e-mail address or a physical address. That
way, if you ever forget your password, you can send the Grex staff mail from
your other address, and they will reset the password for you.



Finding Your Terminal Type
--------------------------------------

The computer and communications software you use to access Grex are together
called your terminal. UNIX systems can theoretically be accessed by many
users using very different computers and communication software. For this
reason Grex and systems like it support a wide variety of terminal types.
This, as you might expect, causes some confusion.

There are some programs on Grex that need to know how to talk to your
terminal, which means you can't use them if you don't know your terminal
type. That makes it worth figuring it out what terminal type you are using.

*Note: You don't have to know your terminal type to use Grex, but Grex will
work better for you if you do.

Usually the terminal type is explained in the communication program
documentation under Terminal Emulation. Fortunately, almost all
communication programs these days have the ability to look like a vt100
terminal (that's the name of a terminal standard developed by Digital
Corporation), so if you aren't sure try that. If you find out that you made
the wrong choice in the Newuser program, don't worry. You can change it
later. (Computers are wonderful that way!)



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             Selecting a Shell

A shell is a UNIX program which gets run as soon as you log in, and keeps
running until you log off. All other programs that you run are launched from
within your shell. It's kind of like a stage on which everything happens.

Grex offers a number of different shells for you to choose from. Which one
you should choose depends on how familiar you are with UNIX and how you want
to use Grex.

   * The Menu Shell
     The menu shell is very popular because it lets you choose most of
     Grex's options from a simple menu. It doesn't explain what those
     options mean, but if you've had some experience with conferencing
     systems this is your best bet.

   * The Lynx Shell
     The Lynx shell gives you the most information and takes the guess work
     out of using Grex. If you're completely unfamiliar with conferencing
     systems, UNIX, and the Internet, this is probably your best bet. It
     does take a certain amount of patience, though, because there is a lot
     of information and it continues to show up whether you need it or not.

   * The BBS Shell
     If you're familiar with conferencing systems and you know generally
     what you want to do here on Grex, whether it's conferencing, e-mail,
     chatting, or something else, you may find the BBS shell the easiest way
     to go. It requires that you learn a few simple commands, but it's fast
     and flexible. For a BBS Tipsheet, send a SASE to Grex INFO at the
     address listed in the Getting More Help section .

   * Programmer Shells (csh, zsh, ksh, sh, tcsh, and bash)
     If you're familiar with UNIX and command-line interfaces and you want
     the full power of a UNIX system available to you when you're using
     Grex, you may find the C shell (csh), or one of the other UNIX shells
     mentioned above, the most efficient way to go. They require that you
     know standard UNIX commands, but they are quick and flexible. For a C
     shell Tipsheet, send a SASE to Grex INFO at the address listed in the
     Getting More Help section.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                      Changing Things about your Login

When you run the Grex Newuser program, you make a number of decisions about
things like what character would be used for backspace, which editor to use,
etc.

If you've decided that something isn't quite right for you and you'd like to
change it, the change program will help you fix things. From inside
PicoSpan, type:

    [ !change ]

or, from another shell, type:

    [ change ]

The change program is completely menu driven and will prompt you each step
of the way. It does all the hard stuff for you.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             Getting More Help

There are a number of good ways to get answers to your Grexish questions or
problems. The first thing you might try is typing

    [ help ]

(or possibly

    [ !help ]

) wherever you happen to be. If that doesn't tell you what you need to know,
try one of these other options.



The Info Conference
--------------------------------------

One of the best ways to get answers is to join the info conference, where
people have been asking and answering questions throughout Grex's existence.
If you don't find the answer to your question there, you can always post it
and check back in a couple of hours.



GREX On-Line Helpers
--------------------------------------

If you have an urgent question, you can type:

    [ write help ]

That notifies a Grex helper (if one is logged on) that you have a question.
Please wait several minutes for a response, since the helper may be helping
someone else or in the middle of an uninterruptible process when you call.

A Grex helper is just a more experienced user who has agreed to answer basic
Grex questions. Not every helper will know the answer to every question, and
helpers don't have any capabilities (other than knowledge) that you don't
have.



The Trouble Login
--------------------------------------

If you have trouble logging in, you can log in as trouble. That login
automatically sends mail to the people who can help you straighten out
account problems. Be sure to give us the information about your account and
how we can reach you. (Staff clairvoyance is a very limited resource.)



More Documentation
--------------------------------------

If there's a document you want, or you need more information about a
specific topic, send a request to
comments@cyberspace.org or mail your request to:

    Cyberspace Communications
    P.O. Box 4432
    Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

             Wandering through the Conferences: the Real GREX!

While it's true that Grex has many services to offer, conferencing is the
heart of the system. Without our conferences, we'd be little more than
another file stop on the information highway. You'll find more than 100
conferences on Grex, with topics ranging from hobbies to public issues, from
computers and games to life roles, with new conferences starting frequently.

So, what is computer conferencing? It's a way of letting a group of people
talk to each other over time, with the computer acting as a scribe, keeping
track of all that has been said. At any point, any participant in a
conference can go back and see everything that has been discussed since the
last restart.



Terminology
--------------------------------------

A conference is a general area for discussion of related topics. (You may
have heard the term forum used elsewhere to describe what we call a
conference on Grex.) For example the kitchen conference is where people talk
about food, cooking and restaurants. In the micros conference the topic is
microcomputers. The coop conference is where you can learn more about how
Grex is run and participate in the decision making process. And the smalls
conference is dedicated to conversation about living with and raising
children.

Each conference consists of items, which anyone in the conference can enter.
An item is a topic for conversation related to the conference subject. For
instance, in the smalls conference you might find items about toilet
training, schools, and cute remarks the little shavers make. You might think
of an item as a comment you've written on a piece of paper, and stuck on a
bulletin board or kiosk in a busy place. As people wander by, they can read
your item. After reading it, they can add a comment or response to the
bottom of the page.

Over time, an item might have many responses and new conversations (called
drift) may evolve from the original item; some popular items have hundreds
of responses. Interaction between the participants of the conference spurs
further discussion and brings up new points, which may spin off into new
items...or not.

So, to summarize the terminology: A conference is a place where people
discuss a particular topic, such as cooking or children. Each conference
consists of items, each of which is a discussion. Items may have any number
of responses, entered by any number of people.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    Getting into the Conferencing System

Grex's conferences can now be accessed in two different ways: through
PicoSpan and through Backtalk. PicoSpan is a program written by Grex founder
Marcus Watts in 1984, and it's the easiest thing to use when you're already
logged on to Grex. Backtalk was written by Grex staffers Jan Wolter and
Steve Weiss in 1996-98, and it operates through the World Wide Web. If you
have access to the web, you can check out Backtalk by going to
www.cyberspace.org and following a few links.

Since this handbook is mainly about what you do when you're logged in to
Grex, it will focus on PicoSpan. First, getting into it:

   * If You Use the Menu Shell:
     Select

         [ B ]

     for BBS.

   * If You Use the Lynx Shell:
     From the initial screen, choose

          Grex Activities Menu

     followed by

          Computer conferencing

   * If You Use the BBS Shell:
     If you selected the BBS shell when you created your account, you should
     see the

          Ok:

     prompt as soon as you log in to Grex. That means you're already in
     PicoSpan.

   * If You Use One of the Programmer Shells:
     To get into the PicoSpan conferencing system from another shell, type:

         [ bbs ]

     at your shell's prompt.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       Using the Conferencing System



Prompts
--------------------------------------

First things first. The two basic prompts that PicoSpan gives you are:

     Ok:

which means that you are reading a conference but not a specific item, and

     Respond or pass?

which you see after you have just read an item.

*Note: Your prompts may differ slightly from the above. For instance, they
may include a few lines of explanatory text or mention more possible
actions. Dont let that throw you - all the examples in this handbook still
apply.



Selecting a Conference
--------------------------------------

When you begin conferencing for the first time, you will automatically start
out in the agora conference. Agora is the main meeting hall on Grex, through
which virtually everyone passes at one time or another. Almost any subject
might come up in here so you'll probably find something there that interests
you.

Many people never go any farther than agora, but there are lots of other
choices! To see an updated list of all the conferences, type:

     Ok: [ help conf ]

You'll be presented with a list of conferences sorted by subject. If you'd
like to look in on, say, the kitchen conference, type:

     Ok: [ join kitchen ]

The first time you do that you'll get a message saying

     You are not a member of /bbs/kitchen2. Do you wish to Join, quit,
     or help?

Type [ J ] to join the conference.



Reading a Conference
--------------------------------------

Once you've found a conference you're interested in, you really only need to
know a few commands to get started using PicoSpan. The commands are browse,
read, and respond.



Seeing a List of Items
--------------------------------------

The browse command presents a list of all the items in the conference. It
will display the item name and the number that identifies that item to the
system.

Once you enter a conference, type:

     Ok: [ browse ]

A list of the items available will scroll across your screen. Note the
numbers of any items that interest you.

*Note: Many PicoSpan commands can be abbreviated. For instance, browse can
be abbreviated as b . We won't discuss all the abbreviations here, but you
may want to guess at them to save yourself some keystrokes.

If you've been in a conference before and want to see which items have
changed since your last visit, type:

     Ok: [ browse new ]



Reading Specific Items
--------------------------------------

Once you've found an item that interests you, the read command shows you the
text of a particular item. If you don't specify an item number, PicoSpan
will show all the items that you haven't read yet. (Not a good idea until
you've gotten familiar with a conference.)

To read, say, item 5, type:

     Ok: [ read 5 ]

If you want to read several items, you can list all of them separated by a
single space and they will come up in the order you listed them. So to read
items 1, 7 and 4 in that order, type:

     Ok: [ read 1 7 4 ]



Reading New Items in a Conference
--------------------------------------

Once you've been reading a conference for a while, you might want to read
everything anyone has said there since you last checked in.

To read all the new responses in a conference, type:

     Ok: [ read new ]

To read all new responses in items 1, 7, and 4, type:

     Ok: [ read 1 7 4 new ]



Responding to an Interesting Item
--------------------------------------

When you've finished reading an item, you may decide that you want to make a
comment about the subject under discussion.

PicoSpan will automatically ask if you want to respond or pass. To respond
to the item, enter:

     Respond or pass? [ r ]

Then type in the text of your response. When you're done, type Ctrl-D or
place a period on a line by itself and hit enter.

To pass on to the next item without responding, enter:

     Respond or pass? [ p ]

(Actually, if you just hit the enter key without typing a command, thats the
same as typing p.) If you are interested in responding to an item, but would
rather do it later, you can type:

     Respond or pass? [ postpone ]

The item will show up again the next time you read new responses.



Viewing Particular Responses
--------------------------------------

Responses, like items, all have numbers. Because a single item can have
hundreds of responses, you may want to go back and view a few of them at a
time without rereading the whole item. To view, say, response number 50,
type:

     Respond or pass? [ only 50 ]

To view all the responses since response 34, simply type:

     Respond or pass?  [ 34 ]

To view the original text of the item, type:

     Respond or pass? [ only 0 ]

To see the title of the item, type:

     Respond or pass? [ header ]



Entering a New Item
--------------------------------------

Once you've been around a while, you'll very likely want to start a new item
of your own to discuss something that no one has brought up yet.

To enter a brand new item:

     Ok: [ enter ]

PicoSpan will then ask you for the text of the item and its title.



Forgetting a Boring or Annoying Item
--------------------------------------

The forget command lets you tell PicoSpan that you don't want to follow an
individual item. When the topic of an item doesn't interest you or you find
something irritating about the drift of the conversation, you can easily
dismiss the item from the list of those you'll read in the future. (So the
next time you do a read new or a browse, it won't show up even if it has new
responses.)

To forget an item you have just read, type:

     Respond or pass? [ forget ]



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         Getting The Hang Of E-Mail

Using e-mail, you can: get to know people around the world, get back in
touch with friends and family you haven't seen in far too long, and keep up
to date on plans with your local friends.

E-mail here on Grex won't cost you anything, so feel free to send and
receive lots of messages -- only, please, keep them reasonably small. We do
have a limited amount of bandwidth to serve the more than 3000 users who log
in each day.

So, how do you get started using e-mail? The first step is to collect some
e-mail addresses for people you want to send mail to, and to give your
e-mail address to people you want to hear from.

Your e-mail address here is yourloginid@cyberspace.org. In other words, if
your login on Grex is tina, your address is: tina@cyberspace.org



Selecting a Mailer
--------------------------------------

Grex offers several programs to allow you to send and receive mail. The only
difference is in the way you use the program to read and send messages. Grex
transmits all e-mail the same way, so that it will be compatible with other
systems on the Internet.

   * Pine
     Pine is a simple, menu driven mailer. Many people who are used to using
     a mouse prefer this mailer. (Its main drawback is that it can be quite
     slow when Grex is busy.) You need to have your terminal type set
     correctly to use Pine. To run Pine, type:

          Ok: [ pine ]

   * Elm
     Elm is also a simple, menu driven mailer. It's similar in concept to
     Pine, but it's been around longer and the details of how it works are a
     bit different. Elm, like Pine, requires that your terminal type be set
     correctly. To run Elm, type:

          Ok: [ elm ]

   * UNIX Mail
     The UNIX Mail mailer will work on any terminal. It's a command line
     mailer, so it's a bit trickier to get used to, but once you get the
     hang of it, it's also faster to use and less of a strain on Grex's
     resources than the other two. To run Mail, type:

          Ok: [ !mail ]



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                   Party

Party is a very popular program on Grex which allows users to have
conversations in real time. It's similar to what are called chat rooms on
the Internet.

You enter Party by typing:

     Ok: [ party ]

If other people are already there (as is almost always the case), very soon
you will start to see messages from them appearing on your screen. You can
respond by simply typing what you want to say. Hit the Enter key to send the
text to everyone.



Noises
--------------------------------------

Occasionally you may see text appear on your screen which looks like:

     <robh hugs steve>

That is called a noise. Party has a table of many noises you can make. You
make a noise by typing the noise's name followed by any parameters it takes.
To make the noise above, for instance, robh typed:

     /hug steve

To see a table of all the noises you can make, just enter a slash (/) by
itself. But be warned, the list is over a thousand lines long. There is a
catch all noise called emote which you may want to know about, because it
lets you use it however you want. For instance, if robh types:

     /emote quacks like a duck

everyone will see:

     <robh quacks like a duck>



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             The World Wide Web

The popularity of the World Wide Web is what has driven the Internet boom of
the 1990s. That boom promises to become one of the most significant changes
in our society begun in the twentieth century.



Accessing the Web through Lynx
--------------------------------------

Grex provides access to the textual portions of the Web through a browser
called Lynx. We would like to be able to show you pictures too, but our link
just can't handle that much traffic.

To run Lynx, type:

     Ok: [ !lynx ]

You will see a web page on Grex which will help you to get started. There is
lots of help for Lynx available online, but here are a few tips:

   * If you know the address of a web page you want to visit, type g
     followed by the address.
   * The up and down arrow keys are used for moving the cursor around within
     a page. Use them to highlight a link you want to follow and press Enter
     to go there.
   * The left and right arrow keys move you backward and forward within the
     list of pages you have visited.
   * Hit ? for help.
   * If your screen gets messed up for some reason, you can have Lynx redraw
     it by hitting Ctrl-R.
   * Hit q to quit out of Lynx.



Making Your Own Home Page on GREX
--------------------------------------

If you'd like to create your own little corner of the Web you can do it on
Grex. Its not quite as simple as typing in a text document; you will need to
know HTML (Hypertext Markup Language). Many references are available both on
the Web and in bookstores on HTML. And of course, you can't store pictures
or multimedia files on Grex, but your page can contain references to them if
they are elsewhere.

To make your own homepage on Grex, type:

     Ok: [ !mkhomepage ]

You'll get a menu which lets you choose to create a new homepage or edit an
old one, and also gives you more information. If you create a new one, it
will be a file called index.html in a subdirectory of your home directory
called www. The address people use to access your page depends on your user
ID; for instance, if you login as janc, then your home page is:
http://www.cyberspace.org/~janc

If you'd like to see the list of frequently asked questions about Grex web
pages, there is a link to it on the first page you see when you run Lynx.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        Peek into Your Mathom Closet

This is a quote from The Fellowship of the Ring by J.R.R. Tolkien:

     So, though there was still some store of weapons in the Shire,
     these were used mostly as trophies, hanging above hearths or on
     walls, or gathered into the museum at Michel Delving. The
     Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbits had no
     immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away, they called a
     mathom. Their dwellings were apt to become rather crowded with
     mathoms, and many of the presents that passed from hand to hand
     were of that sort.

So mathom, strictly speaking, refers to that class of item that while
useless, is too delightful to throw away. Most people have a closet
somewhere in the house where at least a few pieces hide.

Here on Grex, mathom is also a program that allows you to create text gifts
for the people you like. Larry Kestenbaum (polygon) suggested that we adopt
the idea here on Grex, and Valerie Mates (valerie) created the program.

To run the Mathom program, type:

     Ok: [ mathom ]

at any PicoSpan prompt. The program is pretty much self-explanatory. The
commands may all be abbreviated to one letter. So for instance, when you see
the prompt:

     Look (at your mathom), Create (new mathom), Someone (else's mathom
     to look at), Who (has mathom?), Help, or Exit?

that means you can enter [ L ] to look at your mathom, [ C ] to create a new mathom,
etc.

The first time someone gives you a mathom, the program will send you mail to
let you know about it. Once you have mathom (either because you created it
or because someone gave it to you), you can look at it or give it away.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                   Finger

Recall that when you create a Grex account through the Newuser program, you
are asked for some information about yourself. Your answers to those
questions are stored in a file in your home directory called .plan.

You can see someone's .plan by using the finger command. At a PicoSpan
prompt, type:

     Ok: [ finger mta ]

to see mta's .plan. (You'll also see information about when mta last logged
on, and a few other things.) If you enter finger with no parameters:

     Ok: [ finger ]

you'll get a list of everyone who's on Grex right now.

Note that finger is a standard Internet protocol, so if you want them to,
everyone on the Net can see what's in your .plan; or you can set it so that
it is completely private. You can switch back and forth between these
settings using the change program.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

             Going One-on-One: Using Chat, Write, Talk, and Tel

Chat, Write, Talk, and Tel are all programs that let you converse with
another user one-on-one in real time. This can be a good way to make
arrangements on-line to meet with friends for dinner later, or to get to
know another user more personally, even though you live thousands of miles
apart.



Chat and Write
--------------------------------------

Chat and Write are essentially the same program with different options. Both
allow one user on Grex to type text which then appears on another user's
terminal, and vice-versa. Chat passes characters as they arrive, one
character at a time, and Write passes them one line at a time.

To use Chat to talk to user aruba, type:

     Ok: [ chat aruba ]

From now on, everything you type will appear on aruba's screen. This could
potentially be quite confusing and annoying to the recipient, so there are a
few rules of ettiquette which have been established to make Chat and Write
work more smoothly:

   * The person initiating the call waits for the other person to respond
     before saying anything.
   * To signal that it's the other persons turn to type, end your
     transmission with an o (for over) on its own line.
   * Wait for the other person to signal with an o that it's your turn to
     type.
   * When you want to end the conversation, type oo? (for over and out) on a
     line by itself. The other person will respond with oo if he or she is
     ready to sign off.

To exit Chat or Write, type Ctrl-D.

When someone taps you to talk using Chat or Write, youll see a line on your
screen that looks like:

     message from popcorn on ttyq8 at 20:47...

Respond with:

     Ok: [ write ]

or

     Ok: [ chat ]



Talk
--------------------------------------

Talk is the most sophisticated of the conversational programs. It draws a
horizontal line halfway down your screen. Whatever you type appears on the
top half of the screen, and whatever the other person types appears on the
bottom. That keeps the text from getting tangled.

You must have your terminal type set correctly for Talk to work. If you get
all the text as a single column down the left side of your screen, it means
your terminal type is set up incorrectly.

When someone taps you to talk using the Talk program, you'll see something
like:

     Message from Talk_Daemon@grex.org at 13:23 ...
     talk: connection requested by aruba@grex.org.
     talk: respond with: talk aruba@grex.org

Actually all you need to type to respond is:

     Ok: [ talk aruba ]

The reason that the Talk program gave you a full Internet address is that
Talk (unlike Chat and Write) is capable of connecting you to people on other
machines besides Grex.

To exit talk press your interrupt character (usually Ctrl-C).



Tel
--------------------------------------

Tel is short for telegram, and it's a program you can use to send a quick
message to someone else on Grex. To send a message to aruba, type:

     Ok: [ !tel aruba ]

Then enter your text:

     Telegram to aruba on ttyrf...
     Msg: How's it going?

The message you typed will then appear on aruba's screen.



Preventing People from Writing to You
--------------------------------------

If you don't want anyone to tap you for a one-to-one conversation right now,
you can close the chat door by going to any PicoSpan prompt and typing:

     Ok: [ mesg n ]

That will tell people who try to chat with you using Chat, Write, Talk, or
Tel that you're busy right now and not accepting messages. If you decide
that you're open to conversation later in your session, you can re-open the
chat door by typing:

     Ok: [ mesg y ]

It's possible to be more selective about who is allowed to chat you and who
isn't. The change program allows you to set those options.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Text Files and Editors



Your Home Directory
--------------------------------------

When someone creates a new account on Grex, a place is set aside for that
account's files. This is called the account's home directory. Certain
programs store information in files there, and on top of that you can put
any files you want in your home directory, though we ask that you keep your
total disk usage to under 1 megabyte.

Most files on UNIX systems are text files, meaning they contain only
printable characters (letters, numbers, and punctuation) and a few
formatting characters (end-of-line markers and tabs) but no fancy formatting
stuff. Occasionally you may want to create or modify text files in your home
directory - such as the .plan file mentioned in the section on Finger.



Editors
--------------------------------------

An editor program allows you to change text files and create new ones. Its
also useful if you enter a long response in the Mail program or in PicoSpan,
and then realize you made a mistake on the first line and need to go back
and change it.

Most editors show you the full text of a file and allow you to move around
in your text and to cut and paste blocks of text in different places. An
editor is like a word processor, but without a lot of formatting commands
(like boldface and italics) which don't apply to text files. Grex offers a
number of different editors. Which one you should use should depend on what
you're used to and how much fancy stuff you want to do.

   * Pico
     Pico is probably the best bet for a novice Grex user. It's designed to
     fit well with the Pine mailer (it was written by the same people), so
     if you selected Pine, you'll want to use Pico for a consistent
     interface. To use Pico to edit a file called foo, type:

          Ok: [ pico foo ]

     Pico shows you a list of commands you can type at the bottom of the
     screen, which makes it easy to get started without learning a lot of
     keystrokes first. The only drawbacks to using it are that it's a bit
     slow and you can't do anything fancy with it. But it's usually fast
     enough, and you usually don't need to do anything fancy.

   * Joe
     Joe is another simple editor you may want to try - it is similar to
     Wordstar. Type:

          Ok: [ joe foo ]

     to edit the file foo with Joe. You can get it to show you a list of
     commands right on the screen by typing Ctrl-K followed by h.

   * vi, emacs, and the rest
     If you are an experienced UNIX user, you can choose one of the standard
     UNIX editors. These are not for the timid, though.



Using an Editor from within PicoSpan or Mail
--------------------------------------

In order to use an editor from within PicoSpan or Mail or another program,
you must first tell the system what editor you prefer. Type:

     Ok: [ !change ]

and follow the prompts to do that. Then if you're typing a response in
PicoSpan and would like to edit it in your editor, enter a colon on a line
by itself:

     >[ : ]

and PicoSpan will put you in your editor. To do the same thing in Mail,
type:

     [ & ~v ]



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                      Uploading and Downloading Files

There are times when you may want to copy a file that is currently on Grex
onto your home computer, or vice-versa. Knowing how to do that is a very
useful skill, because it allows you to compose long messages offline, to
save text you like on your home computer (so you need not log onto Grex to
get to it), and even to exchange personal computer programs with other
users.

Copying a file from Grex to your home computer is called downloading the
file. (Think of Grex as being upstairs, and your PC as being downstairs.)
Sending files the other way is called uploading.



Transferring Files over a Dial-up Connection
--------------------------------------

There are several protocols used for transferring files over a dial-up
connection.

The ones Grex supports are Kermit, X-Modem, Y-Modem, and Z-Modem. Which
protocol you use depends on what your communications software will support.
Check your documentation for references to transferring files.

Downloading over a Dial-up Connection
Downloading a file is a two-step process. First decide what protocol you are
using, and be sure you know the filename. We'll suppose the file is called
waffles.

     1. First tell Grex to send the file. How you do this depends on
     the protocol you're using:

           Kermit: Ok: [ !kermit -s waffles ]
           X-Modem:Ok: [ !sx waffles ]
           Y-Modem:Ok: [ !sy waffles ]
           Z-Modem:Ok: [ !sz waffles ]

     2. As soon as you get a message that says the file is ready to be
     sent, tell your communications program to receive the file. How
     you do that depends on what program youre using; you'll have to
     read the documentation to find out.

Uploading over a Dial-up Connection
Uploading is also a two-step process. Decide what protocol you're using,
then:

     1. First tell Grex to receive the file. Depending on the protocol,
     you would type:

           Kermit:    Ok: [ !kermit -r ]
           X-Modem:   Ok: [ !rx ]
           Y-Modem:   Ok: [ !ry ]
           Z-Modem:   Ok: [ !rz ]

     2. After you get a message that says Grex is ready to receive, go
     to your communications program and tell it to send the file.
     Again, how you do that depends on your program, so check the
     documentation.



FTP
--------------------------------------

If you connect to Grex over the Internet using telnet, the best way to
transfer files to your home computer is by using FTP. FTP stands for File
Transfer Protocol, and you'll need an FTP program on your home computer to
transfer files. How it works will depend on just which program you have, but
basically you want to tell it to open a connection to cyberspace.org, then
give it your login ID and password.

After you're connected, if you have a graphical interface you should be able
to drag and drop the files you want to move. If you have a command-line
interface (such as the one that comes with Windows 95), the commands are get
to get a file from Grex and put to put a file onto Grex.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             UNIX (Whats That?)

Grex runs a version of the UNIX operating system called SunOS 4.1.4. SunOS
is the underlying software system that lets all the programs you use (such
as PicoSpan, Mail, etc.) run, much as DOS, Mac OS, and Windows 95 allow
programs to run on home computers. There are many versions of UNIX in
existence; ours originally came from Sun Microsystems Inc., the makers of
the Sun-4 computer Grex runs on now.

Explaining the intricacies of UNIX is a formidable task, well beyond the
scope of this handbook. But you are welcome to use Grex to learn as much as
you can about it, studying the documentation online and asking lots of
questions.



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Bibliography

Much of what you need to know to make full use of all GREX's facilities can
be found in a good UNIX reference. The most of the rest can be found in a
good Internet reference. We recommend you check out the local library! Here
are a few places to start:

     Take me To Your Modem: a pocket guide to GREX
     Cyberspace Communications, 1993

     UNIX for Dummies by John R. Levine
     IDG Books Worldwide 1993

     Internet for Dummies by John R. Levine
     IDG Books Worldwide 1993

     Zen and the Art of the Internet: A Beginner's Guide by Brendon P.
     Kehoe
     Prentice Hall, 1993

     The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier by
     Howard Rheingold
     Addison-Wesley, 1993



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                      The GREX Statement of Principles

This system is intended to foster community education and the spiritual and
intellectual enrichment of its users, through the peaceable interchange of
ideas.

The members of this system hope to attract a large, diverse, and mature
group of thinking individuals and thereby to contribute to a better-informed
citizenry.

Governance of the system is based on cooperative principles, including open
membership, democratic control, and nonprofit economics.

This is an open-access system; the public is welcome. However, we encourage
regular users to become members and help support the system financially.
Voting on system policy matters is restricted to members.

It should go without saying that the system is specifically NOT intended for
any illegal purpose.

Users are asked to be considerate of others, and are especially asked to
make a point of setting a good example for those few who may from time to
time fail to return the favor.
