<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Cyberspace Communications Policy Log</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Cyberspace Communications Policy Log</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p>The basic rules for the operation of Cyberspace Communications
  are laid out by the <a href="bylaws.shtml">bylaws</a>. However,
  over the years, various other policies have been set.</p>

  <h3>Membership Referenda</h3>
    <p>Any Cyberspace Communications member can propose a referendum
    for vote by the membership. The results of such votes are binding
    on the board and can only be overturned by another member
    referendum. Bylaw Amendments are not listed here (see the
    <a href="bylaws.shtml">bylaws</a>), nor are unsuccessful motions.
    All motions, can be found at the <a href="votes.xhtml">member vote
    page</a>.</p>

    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Restriction of Outgoing Net Access</strong> - Passed
        April 6, 1994
        Cyberspace Communications (Grex) will restrict outgoing
        Internet access such that only those who are verified and
        paying membership dues will receive this service.

        <p><em>NOTE: This motion is modified by the next
        one.</em></p>
      </li>

      <li>
        <strong>Restriction of Outgoing Net Access</strong> - Passed
        August 17, 1994<br />
        <p>The following internet services enrich the Grex community, do
        not use much bandwidth, and do not provide much potential for
        internet mischief; therefore they should be made available to
        all:<br />
        <code>
          Finger<br />
          Whois<br />
          Ping<br />
          Mail (incoming and outgoing)<br />
          Incoming Usenet News<br />
          Incoming Telnet<br />
          Incoming FTP<br />
          Incoming Lynx<br />
          Talk (and its various permutations)<br />
          Archie<br />
          Veronica<br />
          WAIS<br />
          Gopher (with all Telnet capabilities disabled)
        </code></p>

        <p>The following services will be restricted to
        VERIFIED GREX MEMBERS and VERIFIED GREX USERS (however the
        board shall define that term) because of the potential for
        world-wide mischief:<br />
        <code>
          Outgoing Usenet News
        </code></p>

        <p>The following services will be restricted to
        VERIFIED GREX MEMBERS in good standing, because these
        services utilize a lot of bandwidth, offer less of a benefit
        to the Grex community as a whole, and/or hold the potential
        for system cracking and other undesirable activities:<br />
        <code>
          Outgoing FTP<br />
          Outgoing Telnet<br />
          Outgoing Lynx<br />
          Gopher (with telnet capability enabled.)<br />
          IRC
        </code></p>

        <p>Being that the major objection to open access
        for the above services is the lack of available bandwidth on
        Grex's internet link, It is understood that any of these
        services may be made available to all VERIFIED USERS as well
        as VERIFIED MEMBERS as soon as Grex acquires a link of
        suitable power and robustness.</p>

        <p>In order to maintain the integrity of both Grex, and of
        the Internet as a whole, the Grex board shall have the power
        to restrict or deny internet access to groups or individuals
        who pose a security risk, or who engage in inappropriate
        behavior (as defined by the Grex board).</p>

        <p>The board may also make modifications to this proposal
        without resorting to a member vote in the case of an
        emergency situation, or if some provision of this proposal
        proves to be technically impossible to implement.</p>
      </li>

      <li><strong>Blue Ribbon Campaign</strong> - Passed December 17,
      1998<br />
      That Grex place an endorsement of the Blue Ribbon Campaign for
      Online Freedom of Expression on its web page. This endorsement
      should stay in place at least until the fate of the
      recently-enacted Federal statute which prohibits the display of
      material 'harmful to minors' in certain circumstances is
      decided by the Federal courts, but may be left up longer at the
      discretion of Grex's webmasters.</li>

      <li><strong>Michigan Public Act 33 Lawsuit</strong> - Passed
      June 21, 1999<br />
      To support continued participation of Cyberspace
      Communications, Inc., as a plaintiff in the lawsuit aimed at
      overturning Michigan Public Act 33 of 1999. A vote of "YES"
      shall be construed as supporting continued participation, while
      a vote of "NO" shall be construed as supporting withdrawal from
      the lawsuit.</li>
    </ul>

  <h3>Board Motions</h3>

  <p>The Cyberspace Communications board sometimes makes motions
  authorizing certain actions or establishing certain procedures.
  These could be overridden by another board vote or a member
  referendum. This page lists only motions of lasting interests. It
  does not include motions to experiment with connecting to the
  internet for three months, nor motions to purchase a rubber
  stamp, which are of mere historical interest. More complete
  <a href="minutes.xhtml">board minutes</a> are also available
  on-line.</p>

  <ul>
    <li>
      <strong>Disk Quotas</strong> - April 19, 1994<br />
      Staff is authorized to implement disk quotas for the
      efficient management of disk space. Staff may allow increases
      in quotas of individual users for special needs. Space will
      be allocated without consideration of membership status.
      Users may appeal the decisions of staff to the Board.

      <p><em>NOTE: Staff has never yet done this, but remains
      authorized to do so.</em></p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <strong>Staff Membership</strong> - November 16, 1994<br />
      Staff with permanent root access may at its discretion grant
      specific resources to qualified individuals for the purpose
      of performing work that is beneficial to Grex. Examples of
      such resources would be write access to selected directories
      in order to modify data files or to install software. In the
      event of an emergency, temporary root access may be
      granted by any permanent root.

      <p>Permanent root access, access to the staff conference, and
      access to the "baff" mailing list shall be with the advice
      and consent of the Board.</p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <strong>Grex Ohio</strong> - August 23, 1995<br />
      The organization "GrexOhio" is permitted to use the name
      "Grex" in their name "GrexOhio", pending the adoption by the
      Cyberspace Communications, Inc/ board of an associated club
      charter policy, to which GrexOhio will be required to adhere.

      <p><em>NOTE: GrexOhio has pretty much evaporated but this
      sets a precedent.</em></p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <strong>Verification Policy</strong> - September 27,
      1995<br />
      (1) Anyone requesting access to Grex services for which
      verification is required shall present proof of his or her
      identity. Members and non-members will be held to the same
      verification criteria. In order to be considered verified, a
      person shall submit a photocopy of an item of acceptable
      identification and a signed letter requesting the access.

      <p>(2) The acceptable items of identification are
      government-issued ID, school-issued ID, library-issued ID, or
      a personal check written to Cyberspace Communications Inc. by
      the person requesting access. To be accepted, the item must
      be currently valid (i.e. not expired), must identify the
      person by name, and must include additional identifying
      information other than a photograph (such as home address,
      passport number, or name of school).</p>

      <p>(3) There shall be one individual, referred to hereafter
      as "verifier", who is responsible for accepting verification
      requests and ID, notifying the appropriate staff member(s) so
      that access may be granted if the criteria of (1) and (2) are
      met, and notifying the requester if the ID is not
      acceptable.</p>

      <p>(4) The board shall solicit volunteers and appoint the
      verifier. The term of office is one year and is renewable.
      Any verified user is eligible for the post of verifier. If a
      volunteer for the post is not currently verified, then for
      the purpose of gaining eligibility he or she may present
      identification to the board that meets the criteria
      enumerated in (2).</p>

      <p>(5) In the case of personal checks submitted to the
      treasurer of Cyberspace Communications Inc., the treasurer
      may also verify a user, provided the check meets the criteria
      of (2) and is accompanied by a signed letter as required in
      (1).</p>

      <p>(6) An individual whose request for verification is denied
      may appeal the decision to the board. The board's ruling on
      appeals is final.</p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <strong>Computer Room Keys</strong> - August 23, 1995<br />
      Authorize root access for Dave Lovelace (davel), Rob
      Henderson (robh), and Scott Helmke (scott), and to authorize
      keys for all root staff.

      <p><em>NOTE: This motion says that any root staff who need
      and want keys to the machine room may have them.</em></p>
    </li>

    <li><strong>Deceased Users</strong> - November 15, 1995<br />
    Staff will honor requests to permanently reserve an account of
    a user who has died.</li>

    <li>
      <strong>Message Filters</strong> - June 26, 1996<br />
      Moved that the board express no objection to the installation
      of software that allows a user to filter or permit other
      specific users to send them real-time messages.

      <p><em>NOTE: This is about .yeswrite and .nowrite files,
      which allow a person to filter which users may 'write' or
      'talk' to them. They were briefly controversial.</em></p>
    </li>

    <li><strong>Delinquent Board Members</strong> - June 28,
    1999<br />
    If a board member is late paying his or her dues, the treasurer
    will inform the entire board by e-mail. If he or she still has
    not paid by the time the "New Business" item is reached at the
    end of the next board meeting, the board will consider the
    matter and take appropriate action. This may include declaring
    the board member's seat vacant.</li>

    <li>
      <strong>Institutional Membership Requirements</strong> -
      March 21, 2001<br />
      In addition to those applicable requirements for individual
      memberships, the requirements for institutional Grex
      memberships shall be:<br />
      1) A designated contact person who shall be responsible for
      all use of the member account.<br />
      2) Verifiable personal identification for the designated
      contact person (subject to the same ID requirements as
      individual memberships)<br />
      3) Renewal of institutional memberships requires an update of
      the contact ID.
    </li>
  </ul>
  <em>Last Update Sat Jul 14 01:10:32 EDT 2001</em>
  </div>

</div>
<div>
  <span id="revision">$Id: policy.xhtml 1534 2015-11-10 05:36:54Z kentn $</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
