<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />

  <title>FTP Netiquette</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>FTP (File Transfer Protocol) Netiquette</h1>
  <pre>
 
 As with Telnet, users are guests on remote computer systems. 
 To ensure that other Internet users have access to the 
 information, follow these basic guidelines:
 
 -  Login as "anonymous" and respond to the PASSWORD prompt 
 using your E-Mail address, unless stated otherwise. Some 
 systems require thet you enter GUEST as the password.
 
 -  Limit downloads, especially large downloads, for after 
 normal business hours. Think in terms of the current time at 
 the site that's being visited, not of local time.
 
 -  Copy downloaded files to your personal computer's hard 
 drive or disks. Check downloaded files for viruses. Do not 
 use infected files.
 
 -  Remove files transferred to shared system areas as soon as 
 possible. Copy the files to a local hard drive or disk.
 
 -  Be aware of time and resource limitations of remote 
 systems. Adhere to any stated 
 restrictions.
 
 -  Honor all copyright or licensing agreements. If the 
 program you downloaded is beneficial to your use, pay any 
 author's registration fee. Remove unwanted programs from your 
 systems.
 
 -  Routinely and frequently virus scan your system, 
 especially when receiving or downloading files from other 
 systems to prevent the spread of virus.
 
-----------------------------------------
 
 Acknowledgment
 
 In the spirit of the Internet, this information was gleaned 
 from the following source:
 
 http://thomas.loc.gov, who gleaned it from:
 
 The Whole Internet User's Guide &amp; Catalog - Ed Krol, First 
 Edition, September 1992
 
 The Internet Guide for New Users - Daniel Dern, 1994
 
 The NET:User Guidelines and Netiquette - Arlene H. Rinaldi, 
 Computer User Services, Florida Atlantic University
</pre>
</body>
</html>
