<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />

  <title>Usenet Netiquette</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Electronic Bulletin Board Netiquette</h1>
  <pre>
 If you decide to participate in bulletin board discussion 
 groups (Usenet), you should familiarize yourself with the dos 
 and don't of the group. As a new Usenet user, you should read 
 through the postings in news.announce.newusers until you are 
 familiar with what's there.
 
 -  If you are interested in a group, subscribe to it and take 
 some time getting to know the Usenet community and group 
 before you post any messages. A good rule of thumb is to read 
 frequently; post infrequently.
 
 -  Read all postings marked FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions.) 
 These postings may appear in the group itself or in a special 
 group called news.newusers.questions  and news.answers. You 
 may find your question has already been discussed.
 
 -  Remember that what you post may be seen locally and around 
 the world. Post to the smallest distribution possible to get 
 your message known. Read the entire thread before responding. 
 If the answer is not of general interest to the entire group, 
 then respond to the submitter of the item privately, through 
 E-Mail. Never post personal messages; use E-Mail.
 
 -  Use descriptive titles in the subject field of your
 article. People will choose to read your postings based on
 the subject. Use a "signature" block at the bottom of your
 postings and E-Mail messages. This information usually
 includes your full name, Internet E-Mail address, and contact
 information such as phone and mailing address. Signature
 blocks should not exceed 3-4 lines. Add a disclaimer to the
 signature block if your message could be perceived as being
 official business or reflecting the opinion of your office.
 
 -  Read all follow-ups and don't repeat what has already been 
 said. Edit whatever isn't directly applicable to your reply. 
 Including the entire article adds to the length and will 
 annoy those reading it.   
 
 -  Be polite and avoid criticizing individuals in writing for 
 their postings. This is known as "flaming" and is generally 
 considered bad form.
 
 -  Limit line length of messages and postings to less than 60 
 characters. Use capitalization for emphasis only. An entire 
 message sent in uppercase is called "shouting" and is 
 considered rude. Check your postings for spelling, grammar, 
 and clarity. You will get your point across more effectively 
 and avoid spelling and grammatical flames.
 
 -  Respect copyright and licensing agreements. It is 
 considered both rude and a violation of copyright statues to 
 post private E-Mail correspondence without the permission of 
 the author.
 
 -  Act in a professional and courteous manner. Be careful 
 what you say about others: E-Mail is easily forwarded.
 
 -  Learn abbreviation conventions and network vocabulary and 
 use them where possible. Some examples include: BTW for "By 
 the Way," IMHO for "In My Humble Opinion," FYI for "For Your 
 Information," and ;-) depicts a winking smiley face. 
 
 -  Be sure your posting is appropriate. There are news groups 
 designed for pro/con discussions, and there are groups where 
 people with similar views meet to commiserate. In other 
 words, don't complain about why you hate classical music in 
 the classical music group.
 
 -  Use discretion when forwarding mail to group addresses or 
 distribution lists. Instead, reference the source of a 
 document and provide instructions on how to obtain a copy.
 
-----------------------------------------

 Acknowledgment
 
 In the spirit of the Internet, this information was gleaned 
 from the following source:
 
 http://thomas.loc.gov, who gleaned it from:
 
 The Whole Internet User's Guide &amp; Catalog - Ed Krol, First 
 Edition, September 1992
 
 The Internet Guide for New Users - Daniel Dern, 1994
 
 The NET:User Guidelines and Netiquette - Arlene H. Rinaldi, 
 Computer User Services, Florida Atlantic University

</pre>
</body>
</html>
