<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex Staff Notes: Eggdrop and Other Programs not Welcome
  on Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1>NOTE: These notes are of historical value only!</h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p>Grex has changed radically since this note was first written.
  It no longer runs on a Sun running SunOS, but rather on an x86
  machine running an open source BSD-based operating system. However,
  IRC bots (or bots of any kind) are still not allowed on Grex. Though
  we have much better network connectivity now, we do not want to
  upset our network provider or colocation service with malicious
  activity originating from Grex, so we severely limit what services
  users can run on Grex itself. Sorry, eggdrop and other bots are
  still not allowed.</p>

  <p><a href="index.xhtml">[index]</a></p>

  <h4>Grex Staff Notes: Frequently Asked Questions about Eggdrop
  and other Programs not Welcome on Grex</h4>

  <p>We have had thousands of users asking about running IRC bots,
  IRC clients, and bouncers on our system. <font
  color="red"><strong>We are sorry to say that we do not and can
  not support <tt>eggdrop</tt> or any other IRC bot or bouncer
  here on Grex.</strong></font> We do allow IRC clients to be run,
  but only by paying users, not for free. Since lots of people
  seem to be confused and irate about this, we thought we'd write
  a bit more about this policy.</p>

  <h2>What are IRC Clients?</h2>
  <p>IRC is the "Internet Relay Chat," a huge Internet-wide live chat
  area. You can create "channels" on IRC where you can talk to other
  people who also join the channel. Every line you type is seen by all
  the other people in the channel, and you see every line they type. To
  connect to the IRC, you need an IRC client, just like you need a web
  browser to read the web. If your computer has a web connection, you
  can run one there. Or you can connect to another computer, either
  over the net or by dialing in, and run an IRC client there to connect
  to the IRC.</p>

  <p>Grex does <strong>not</strong> give non-paying users access to
  the IRC. Grex has the "irc 2.8.2" client installed for the use of
  our members. There are others that could be installed if our
  members wanted, like <tt>BitchX</tt> or <tt>mIRC</tt>, but there
  has been no demand for them. Occasionally people trying to get
  around this restriction try to download and install their own
  copies of IRC clients. This doesn't work. See below.</p>

  <h2>What is Eggdrop?</h2>
  <p><tt>Eggdrop</tt> is the most popular of
  many so-called "IRC-bots". There is quite a bit of good
  information about
  <tt>eggdrop</tt> on the web. We obviously aren't
  <tt>eggdrop</tt> experts, so if you really want to know a lot
  about it, you may want to search elsewhere for info.</p>

  <p><tt>Eggdrop</tt> is used with IRC. Computer programs can be
  written that join IRC channels just like a human would through an
  IRC client. Such programs, called "bots" or "robots," can
  interact with people in various ways. Besides being cute, bots
  can perform some useful functions, like holding channels open
  when nobody is home, keeping them from being taken over by other
  users, controlling what users can join the channel, providing
  extra lag-free talk channels that aren't affected by net-splits,
  allowing users to upload and download files, and linking between
  different IRC networks. Lots of people who want to rule their own
  channels want <tt>eggdrop</tt> bots. It's a useful and valuable
  tool.</p>

  <p><tt>Eggdrop</tt> needs to run on a Unix system, which isn't
  hard to find (several excellent free Unix systems exist that can
  be installed on most any PC). However, to gain the full benefit
  of <tt>eggdrop</tt>, you need to be running it on a system that
  is connected to the internet 24 hours a day, which isn't true for
  most people's home computers. So lots of people are looking for
  systems to run <tt>eggdrop</tt> on, and lots of people come
  looking here at Grex. After lots of hard work, they eventually
  discover that <tt>eggdrop</tt> won't work here. See below.</p>

  <h2>What are Bouncers?</h2>
  <p>Some people would like to be able to
  connect to IRC without revealing their identities. One way to do
  this would be to install a small program on a system like Grex
  which just bounces their IRC connection. Then they point the IRC
  client on their computer to the bouncer running on Grex, which
  reflects the connection to an IRC server someplace else. Then it
  looks to everyone on the IRC as if the connection is coming from
  Grex, not from this person's own computer. You can even get
  fancier, and chain together several bouncers, so your connection
  goes through several places before hitting your destination,
  making it even harder to trace. And this doesn't only work for
  IRC, it works for almost any kind of net connection.</p>

  <p>The most common bouncer is called <tt>bnc</tt> or
  <tt>boun</tt> or <tt>bounce</tt>. There seem to be several
  others, including <tt>datapipe</tt> and <tt>anonirc</tt>.</p>

  <p>Since Grex accounts can be obtained without giving much (or
  any) personal information, lots of people think Grex is a pretty
  good place to put a bouncer. We currently have about half a dozen
  different people try to install one every day. None of them work.
  See below.</p>

  <h2>What is Grex?</h2>
  <p>Grex is a public access system supported
  entirely by donations from its users. We have no corporate or
  government funding. Although we have about 25,000 users, only
  around 100 of them ever give us any money and most of them don't
  give us much. All the staff work to maintain this system is done
  by unpaid volunteers who do work here only because they enjoy
  using this system and believe in our system's mission. We are not
  wealthy, and our computer is not one any sane person would be
  proud to own (you can take a look at it
  <a href="http://www.unixpapa.com/grextech/pumpkin/">here</a>).</p>

  <p>What is this mission that inspires people to donate money to
  us and do work for us?</p>

  <ul>
    <li>First, we house a virtual community of users who come here
    to talk to each other - to learn, to teach, to flirt, to laugh,
    to share their ideas and opinions. Almost all of our support
    comes from people who take part in that on-line community and
    feel that it is an important enough part of their lives that
    they want to help support it.</li>

    <li>Second, we have a charitable mission: to provide free net
    access to people who can not justify the expense of a
    commercial internet account. We believe that it is important
    that all people have access to the net, regardless of economic
    status. Because there are many such people needing access and
    because we have very limited resources, we can provide only the
    most basic services:

      <ul>
        <li>We have a very good conferencing area, open to
        all.</li>

        <li>We have our own live chat area, open to all.</li>

        <li>We provide free Email, but not POP or mailing
        lists.</li>

        <li>We provide access to a non-graphical web browser.</li>

        <li>We provide free web pages space, but can't allow
        graphics.</li>

        <li>We provide full shell access for those interested in
        learning Unix.</li>

        <li>For members, we support IRC, but not IRC bots.</li>

        <li>We provide incoming telnet and ftp service, but limit
        outgoing service to members.</li>
      </ul>
    </li>
  </ul><p>We'd love to be able to provide more free services, but
  given how few resources we have, it's a miracle that we can do as
  much as we do. We <em>have</em> to set some limits on services.</p>

  <h2>Why doesn't Grex provide free IRC access?</h2>
  <p>Our impression is that, second only to E-mail, IRC is the free
  service most in demand on the net. We sometimes still question whether
   offering E-mail was all that bright an idea. What we really want to
   do is conferencing, but providing free E-mail consumes vastly more
   of our computer resources and staff time than conferencing does. But
   it really does seem to be a very worthwhile service for an awful lot
   of people, so we're willing to keep it up, in spite of the
   headaches.</p>

  <p>Though IRC can certainly be a valuable service, we think it is
  generally less valuable than E-mail is, and in our experience, it
  generates at least as many administrative headaches as E-mail
  does. We just don't see any way that we could stretch our
  resources far enough to be able to deal with offering free IRC.
  If we had another computer, another net connection, and a couple
  full-time equivalents worth of skilled staff time from people who
  really cared about IRC, we might be able to do it, but as it is,
  the thought of all that extra work just makes us vaguely queasy.
  Our plates are pretty full.</p>

  <p>So we permit IRC access only to our validated, paying members.
  That's a small group of people, who tend to be generous and
  responsible people who cause us very few problems. In fact, very
  few of them ever use IRC.</p>

  <h2>Why doesn't Grex support eggdrop?</h2>
  <p><tt>Eggdrop</tt> uses huge amounts of net bandwidth and cpu time.
  This may not seem obvious at first glance. It would appear that a big
  bloated mail program like <tt>pine</tt>, which we do allow, uses much
  more. But a user runs <tt>pine</tt> only while he is connected to
  Grex. Since we only allow about 80 users to be signed on at any given
  time, we never have to deal with more than 80 pine processes running
  at a time. But for an <tt>eggdrop</tt> bot to do it's job of
  holding a channel open while the user is gone, it would have to run
  24 hours a day, seven days a week. If we let all our users run
  <tt>eggdrop</tt> we would have 25,000 <tt>eggdrop</tt>s running at
  any given time. The fact that it runs all the time means that it
  would add up to using vastly more computer resources than even big,
  fat, ugly <tt>pine</tt>. There is no way we could share our
  computer over 25,000 users if we let users run things like that.</p>

  <p>Given the huge demand for <tt>eggdrop</tt>, if we permitted
  people to run it from their free Grex accounts, our system would
  be almost instantly completely overwhelmed with <tt>eggdrop</tt>
  bots, and would be unusable for anything else. Having
  <tt>eggdrops</tt> running on our system would not contribute to
  our on-line community at all, and it does not seem to be such a
  basic service that we need to offer it to everyone in the world
  for free. Since <tt>eggdrop</tt> does not particularly serve our
  mission, we can not justify allowing its use on Grex, even for
  users who help us out by donating money.</p>

  <h2>Why doesn't Grex support bouncers?</h2>
  <p>Bouncers share the same basic problem that IRC bots have: they
  need to run continuously. This is one stroke against them.</p>

  <p>Grex is trying to provide valuable services to people, and the
  social value of bouncers is somewhat questionable. It would be
  easy to say that anyone trying to hide their identity is trying
  to escape the consequences of their actions, and is thus immoral
  scum. But we shouldn't forget that a person speaking out against
  the immoral actions of their government might also want a way to
  do so without paying the consequences their government deals out
  to such people. In many cases, a degree of anonymity is a boon to
  free speech. That is why we allow people to take out accounts on
  our system without having to be validated. Our primary purpose is
  to be a conferencing system, and we don't want to put any
  obstacles in the way of speaking freely in our forums. It is true
  that a small fraction of our users try to use this anonymity to
  do harm to our system or to attack other people, but within the
  limits of our own system, we have chosen to put up with that as
  the price of allowing other people some legitimate anonymity.</p>

  <p>However, we cannot make the same decision for the rest of the
  systems on the internet. If we want to unleash anonymous people
  on our own system, that's our right. Allowing people to use our
  system to gain anonymous access to other people's systems is a
  far more dubious enterprise. We suspect that if we did so, it
  would be used far more for ill purposes than for good ones.</p>

  <p>Of course, the most common reason people want bouncers is to
  prevent other users from knocking them off the net by launching
  denial of service attacks against their machines. With a bouncer
  on Grex, the attack would be directed against Grex instead. No
  thanks.</p>

  <h2>How can I convince you to change your minds?</h2>
  <p>Grex runs as
  a democracy. All policies are ultimately determined by the
  members with public discussions in the
  <a href="/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek:coop">Grex Co-op Conference</a>. If
  you think you can convince our members that you <em>should</em>
  be able to run a free IRC client, <tt>eggdrop</tt>, or a bouncer
  here, you are welcome to try. I don't think your chances of
  success are good though - this is not a new issue.</p>

  <h2>What if I just install the program myself?</h2>
  <p>Every week, we
  have three or four users try to compile and install
  <tt>eggdrop</tt> or <tt>BitchX</tt> on Grex, and several dozen
  trying to install bouncers. None have ever succeeded. Here's why:</p>

  <ol>
    <li>FTP transfers of programs as large as <tt>eggdrop</tt> or
    <tt>BitchX</tt> slow down our net connection badly. When staff
    members notice the net connection is slow they look for the
    cause, and if they see it is an <tt>eggdrop</tt> ftp, they kill
    it.</li>

    <li>Compiling <tt>eggdrop</tt> or <tt>BitchX</tt> on a system
    as slow as Grex takes a long time (maybe a hour) and slows the
    system noticably all that time. Staff members tend to notice
    and kill it.</li>

    <li>Once you have your client, bot or bouncer compiled, you'll
    find that it won't work. We have modified our kernel to prevent
    non-members from making most kinds of outbound internet
    connections, including all IRC connections. This is what stops
    everyone cold. For information (with source) about the Grex
    kernel blocks, see our <a href="blocks.xhtml">technical
    notes on kernel blocks</a>.</li>

    <li>If you got past that (nobody ever has), you'd still have to
    get past the <tt>robocop</tt> daemon that kills all background
    processes not associated with a logged in user. This means that
    your <tt>eggdrop</tt> or bounce process will be automatically
    killed shortly after you log off of Grex.</li>

    <li>And if you got past that, you'd still have the fact that we
    banned these things because running them slows down the system
    too much. So the staff would presumably notice if you somehow
    miraculously got the thing to work here.</li>
  </ol><p>Normally, we wouldn't mind very much if you wanted to waste
  your time in any activity as futile and hopeless as trying to
  install <tt>eggdrop</tt> or an IRC client on Grex, but we get far
  too many people doing this and futile attempts to build
  <tt>eggdrop</tt> are consuming a significant fraction of our
  scarce resources. So please don't even try. Bouncer programs, on
  the other hand, are usually quite small, so you can build those
  all you like, and we won't even care unless you somehow get it
  working, in which case we will break it.</p>

  <h2>Do you know of anyplace where I can run eggdrop?</h2><p>If there
  was a public access system anywhere on the internet that was
  deranged enough to allow random strangers to run
  <tt>eggdrop</tt>, we'd be delighted to direct you there, but
  we've never heard of such a place. We've seen a couple systems
  try, but they all gave it up within a week. If you want to find a
  place to run <tt>eggdrop</tt>, you'll either need to pay money
  for the privilege (there is a list of places where you can run
  <tt>eggdrop</tt> for a small fee
  <a href="http://www.egghelp.org/shells.htm">here</a>), set up
  your own system (also likely to cost money), or exercise some
  inside connections.</p>

  <h2>So what good is a shell account if you can't run eggdrop or
  bouncers?</h2><p>Yes, this is really is a frequently asked question.
  These days it seems that most people looking for "Unix shell
  accounts" know only that it is something you need to run
  <tt>eggdrop</tt>, and haven't the faintest idea what it is.</p>

  <p>A "shell" is is the Unix name for a program whose primary
  purpose is to let a user run other programs. It's the interface
  that you use to tell the computer what to do. It normally starts
  up automatically as soon as you sign on to the computer. If some
  heathen ported "Microsoft Windows" or the MSDOS "Command.com"
  program to Unix, then we'd probably call them shells. Most Unix
  shells work by typing commands, but we have some menu based ones
  that are easier for people new to Unix to use. The best known
  Unix shells are "csh" and "sh", but there are dozens of different
  ones around, including some restricted shells that let you do
  only a few things. Grex's shells are unrestricted, but our
  network connection is restricted.</p>

  <p>Having a shell account generally means that you have the
  access to do all sorts of things, not just a limited list. We
  give out shell accounts because we believe in giving away lots of
  access.</p>

  <p>So what good is a shell account? I dunno. What good is a
  computer? Grex offers a very large number of services, a few of
  which are accessible through the web, but most of which are
  accessible only through our shell accounts. Please do enjoy using
  the services we provide, and good luck finding a server for your
  IRC bot.</p>
  </div>

  <div id="history">
  <h4>Document History:</h4>
  <p>
  Mar 9, 1998: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
  Initial revision.<br />

  Aug 5, 1998: Steve Weiss (<a href="mailto:srw@cyberspace.org">srw</a>) -
  Increased users to 25,000.<br />

  Feb 4, 1999: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
  Replaced references to "<tt>kill_orphans</tt>" with "<tt>robocop</tt>".<br />

  Feb 16, 1999: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
  Broaden discussion to talk more about IRC clients and bouncers too.
  </p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: eggdrop.xhtml 1607 2017-05-31 16:16:21Z cross $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
