<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex Staff Notes: Security Goals</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1>Grex Staff Notes: Security Goals</h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p><a href="index.xhtml">[index]</a></p>
  <p>The security problems on Grex are a little different than those
  other systems have to deal with. On most systems, the first layer of
  security is preventing unauthorized people from logging in to the
  computer. But the whole point of Grex is to give away free accounts
  to total strangers. We <em>want</em> unauthorized people to log into
  our system.</p>

  <p>From a security standpoint, this is both a blessing and a
  curse. On the positive side, we don't have to worry about
  mysterious people somehow logging into our system, because that
  happens all the time anyway. Some things that are considered
  secret on other systems aren't secret here.</p>

  <p>For example, on most Unix systems, the login program responds
  to all errors with the message "Login incorrect". They don't
  differentiate between a bad login name or a bad password for a
  perfectly good login name, because they don't want to give
  hackers any clue about which login names exist. But Grex's login
  program has been modified to give messages like "Password
  Incorrect" and "No Such Login". Since anyone can get on our
  system, the full list of login names is no secret. Making the
  messages more helpful means staff gets fewer requests for help
  and the requests we get are less confused.</p>

  <p>On the negative side, we don't have that first layer of
  security that other systems do, and we do still have things we
  need to keep secure. To understand our approach to security, it
  is important to first understand what our goals are. We need
  security for several reasons:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>
      <strong>Protecting the privacy of users.</strong>

      <p>Our users should feel reasonably confident their mail and
      their files are not being read by other people. They should
      also know that other people can't log into their accounts and
      pretend to be them. To ensure this, we need to do our best to
      protect the <a href="passwd.xhtml">security of the
      passwords</a>, and of the root account (which has access to
      everything).</p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <strong>Restricting net access.</strong>

      <p>We are happy to give people anonymous access to our
      system, and we are prepared to deal with having mysterious
      people doing mysterious things on our system, but most of the
      rest of the Internet doesn't feel this way. Because of this,
      we allow anonymous people to come into Grex from the net, but
      we restrict who can go out to the net from Grex. This
      discourages people from using Grex as an anonymizer while
      attacking other systems. Having those restrictions means we
      must enforce them. This is done on Grex through
      <a href="blocks.xhtml">modifications of the Unix
      kernel</a>.</p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <strong>Prevent resource hogging.</strong>

      <p>Grex has very limited resources spread over an awful lot
      of people. One user hogging a disproportionate amount of our
      net bandwidth or CPU can prevent hundreds of other users from
      using Grex at all. Unfortunately, technical fixes to these
      kinds of problems usually cost too much in overall system
      performance, or in limiting legitimate use of the system to
      be desirable. In most cases, we deal with such problems on a
      case-by-case basis, often simply by talking to people instead
      of installing technical fixes. For example, we don't use the
      disk quota systems built into SunOS because they slow down
      the system too much. Instead we manually send mail to people
      asking them to reduce their usage, and manually reduce disk
      space for any users who aren't cooperative. However, when
      dealing with things manually becomes too much of a burden on
      our limited staff time, we do install hard resource limits,
      notably we (mainly Marcus Watts) have modified our mail
      software to limit the sizes of mailboxes.</p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <strong>Prevent harassment of users.</strong>

      <p>Occasionally one user will decide that he or she needs to
      interfere with another user's use of Grex, perhaps by
      flooding their screens with messages or otherwise messing
      things up for them. This kind of behavior is never welcome on
      Grex, and we believe in providing people with tools that
      allow them to shut out unwelcome messages. The standard Unix
      messaging programs "write" and "talk" have been modified here
      to limit abuse.</p>
    </li>

    <li>
      <strong>Tracking problem users.</strong>

      <p>From time to time we have users who come in and "try the
      locks," that is, attempt to break our security. We consider
      such people rather puzzling. Many of them pretend to be some
      kind of "information freedom fighters," but the only secrets
      on Grex are the personal mail and files of our users. Taking
      advantage of the free access we give away to try to pry into
      the private business of other users, sneak into other systems
      on the net, or harass people is downright rude. So we like to
      be able to track such rude people and turn them in to the
      proper authorities for suitable chastisement. That means we
      log everything, monitor the logs continually, and keep the
      logs for a long, long time. If you want to "test the locks"
      purely to satisfy your own curiosity, please do send mail to
      <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>
      <em>first</em>, and please do advise us if you notice any
      problems. Thanks.</p>
    </li>
  </ul>Grex's staff operates with a certain amount of secrecy.
  Staff meetings, unlike board meetings, are not open to the
  public. The staff conference is the only closed conference on
  Grex. This is done for several reasons. First, we sometimes have
  to discuss the activities of individual users who may be causing
  problems of the sort described above. We don't want to discuss
  people's usage in public, particularly if they turn out to be
  engaged only in innocent activities. Second, there is usually
  some time lag between the time we discover a security problem and
  the time we fix it. We'd like to keep the existance of problems
  secret for that time period, if possible.

  <p>In general, however, we do not believe in keeping our security
  arrangements secret. This is why we have published detailed
  descriptions of most of our security arrangements on the web. We
  also maintain a public discussion forum on technical issues
  related to the operation of Grex in the
  <a href="/cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Agarage">garage conference</a>. As a general
  principle, security by obscurity is generally very poor security.
  People who want to crack your security to steal things are often
  highly motivated, and secrets will leak out. By publishing our
  methods, we put nice people who are merely interested in security
  systems on an equal footing with the bandits. The nice people
  will probably let us know if they notice any weaknesses. The
  bandits probably won't. Thus publishing our security arrangements
  should make them more secure in the long run.</p>

  <p>Grex runs SunOS 4.1.4, but has made many modifications to the
  basic software. Other technical notes give more detailed
  information about security-related aspects of these modifications
  to Grex:</p>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="passwd.xhtml">The Password Database</a> -
    description of how passwords are stored and accessed.</li>

    <li><a href="blocks.xhtml">The Kernel Blocks</a> - descriptions
    of kernel modifications to restrict outgoing net access.</li>
  </ul>

  <div id="history">
  <h4>Document History:</h4>
  <p>
  Mar 30, 1998: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
  Minor updates and corrections.<br />

  Nov 19, 1997: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
  Expansion of discussion of secrecy.<br />

  Aug 13, 1997: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
  Initial Revision.<br /></p>
  </div>
  </div>

</div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
