<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "../../style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex Staff Notes: Equipment Wish List</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1>Grex Staff Notes: Equipment Wish List</h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p><a href="index.xhtml">[index]</a>
  This page contains
  a list of some of the equipment Cyberspace Commuications would
  like to obtain for Grex. Obviously we'd like, say a Sun
  Enterprise 10000 server or a Compaq Alphaserver DS20, and maybe a
  couple T3 connections. (though, come to think of it, I don't
  think we'd have any idea how to scale our operations to that
  level). This list, however, is aimed at things that would allow
  more incremental improvements on our current operations.</p>

  <p>There are a separate pages listing our
  <a href="/~invent/index.cgi">current equipment</a> and describing
  <a href="about.xhtml">its configuration</a>. If you are looking
  to swap stuff, check our list of <a href="forsale.xhtml">equipment
  for sale or swap</a>.</p>

  <p>Cyberspace Communications is a registered 501(c)3 tax-exempt
  corporation. That means that if you are willing to donate any
  equipment to us, it is tax deductable.</p>

  <p>We will probably buy some of this equipment eventually, but
  since Cyberspace Communications is supported entirely by
  voluntary donations from our users, we don't exactly have a lot
  of money to work with. A lot of this stuff we won't be able to
  obtain until it gets obsolete enough to be sold cheap or given
  away.</p>

  <p>This are in no special order:</p>

  <ul>
    <li><strong>4M or 16M 30-pin SIMMs</strong> - Our 4/670 system
    uses 30-pin SIMMs in sets of 16. We've already got 4 sets of 4M
    SIMMs and a couple spares. We'd like lots more. Even more, we'd
    like to get some 16M SIMMs.</li>

    <li><strong>Sun 501-1901 Memory Expansion Board</strong> - This
    is the memory expansion board for the 4/670. We have one, but
    some previous owner mangled many of the SIMM sockets, so it
    takes loving care to get all the SIMMS in and working. One in
    decent condition would be nice.</li>

    <li><strong>110 Volt Power Supplies</strong> - We have drive
    bays and disk bays from a Sun 4/690 system, but they all have
    220-volt power supplies, and we haven't any way to get 220-volt
    power. Interchangable 110-volt power-supplies exist (like the
    ones in Sun 4/370s or 4/670 chassis). We have one of those.
    We'd like more.</li>

    <li><strong>SCSI Disks</strong> - We have lots of full-height
    2.1 Gig SCSI disks. Our budget is tight enough that saving a
    few dollars of in power makes a difference to us, so we'd like
    to get some disks that use less power per gigabyte of
    storage.</li>

    <li><strong>Modems</strong> - We currently have a row of
    thirteen 14.4bps consumer-grade modems balanced on a shelf.
    We'd love an industrial grade rack-mount modem bank, of the
    sort that ISPs are retiring everywhere. Probably we aren't that
    interested in small numbers of miscellaneous modems - it's hard
    enough to administer a bank of modems without having lots of
    different kinds.</li>

    <li><strong>Terminal Servers</strong> - We aren't all that
    overwhelmingly happy with our Chase IOLan terminal servers.
    We'd love to upgrade them.</li>

    <li><strong>FDDI or Fast Ethernet Cards</strong> - We have one
    SBus FDDI card. If we had another we could set up one of our
    4/670's as an AFS server (assuming we could find appropriate
    AFS software). Or a pair of SBus Fast Ethernet cards would be
    just as good.</li>
  </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="history">
  <h4>Document History:</h4>
  <p>Feb 11, 1999: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
    Initial Version.</p>

  <p>Jul 16, 2001: Jan Wolter (<a href="mailto:janc@cyberspace.org">janc</a>) -
    Partial Update.</p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: wishlist.xhtml 1454 2014-03-26 23:24:04Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
