<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:carl@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>Logging In</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Logging In</h1>Set your communications software to 7-E-1 at
  1200 or 2400 Baud, to match your modem. Then dial 761-3000.

  <p>If you don't have an account yet, type:</p>

  <blockquote>
    newuser
  </blockquote>at the <em>login:</em> prompt.

  <p>GREX will guide you through creating your own account by
  asking you a series of questions.</p>

  <p>If you want your answers to remain private, you can say so at
  the end of the account creation process. If you decide to keep
  your information private, only the GREX staff will have access to
  it. The private information will <em>not</em> be divulged to
  other people. If you decide to share your information, it will be
  available to any user who is curious about you.</p>

  <p>Some important questions GREX will ask:</p>

  <p><em>1) What shell do you want?</em></p>

  <blockquote>
    If you don't know what this question means, choose the
    <em>bbs</em> shell. You'll be able to change your mind later,
    if you like.
  </blockquote><em>2) What login id do you want?</em>

  <blockquote>
    This is the "name" the GREX machine and other users will know
    you by on-line. You can't change this, so give it some thought.
    (Many people use their initials or a nickname.)
  </blockquote><em>3) What password do you want?</em>

  <blockquote>
    Your password shouldn't be an English word, a word from the
    dictionary, or anything that can easily be linked to you,
    because it protects your account from abuse by others.
  </blockquote><em>4) What's your terminal type?</em>

  <blockquote>
    See <a href="det.html">Determining Your Terminal Type</a>.
  </blockquote>Don't worry about mistakes here; items 1,3, &amp; 4
  can be changed using the "modify" program later.

  <p>Once you've finished creating your account and logged in by
  typing your login id and password at the appropriate prompts,
  you'll find yourself in the conference called <em>Agora</em>.</p>
</body>
</html>
