<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:carl@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>Reading Usenet News</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Reading Usenet News</h1>One of GREX's special features is
  public access to Usenet News, a world-wide, "floating"
  conferencing system. Anyone is free to read Usenet postings, but
  for authentication purposes, only GREX members are allowed to
  post articles.

  <p>To read news, type:</p>

  <blockquote>
    !trn
  </blockquote>at the <em>Ok:</em> prompt. Once you activate trn,
  you're automatically registered to the local GREX newsgroups, and
  a few important announcement-related groups. If you want to see a
  list of all available newsgroups, type:

  <blockquote>
    !more ~news/newsgroups
  </blockquote>at the <em>"...read now?"</em> prompt. Type "q" to
  stop looking at the list. (It's <em>very</em> long!)

  <p>To go to a particular newsgroup, type "g" followed by the name
  of the newsgroup. For instance, to go to mi.news, type:</p>

  <blockquote>
    gmi.news
  </blockquote>To select the articles that you want to read from
  within a newsgroup, type the letter of the article. If you don't
  care about the topic in an article, you can "kill" it, so you
  won't see future responses. Put the cursor next to the article's
  identifying letter or number [typing n(ext) or p(revious)] then
  press k(ill).

  <p>Use the space bar to select the default command at each
  prompt. Type "h" for a list of options.</p>
</body>
</html>
