<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:carl@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>Take Me To Your Modem!</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Take Me To Your Modem!</h1>

  <h1>A Pocket Guide to GREX</h1>

  <blockquote>
    (313) 761-3000<br />
    7-E-1<br />
    1200/2400 bps
  </blockquote><br />
  A simple Guide to Computer Conferencing for the newcomer to GREX.

  <p>PicoSpan is a product of UniCom, Inc.</p>

  <p>January 9, 1994</p>

  <p>Copyright (c) 1993 Cyberspace Communications, Inc.</p>

  <p>GREX is a local, open-access cyberspace community, featuring
  computer conferencing and Usenet news through the magic of UNIX
  (tm).</p>

  <p>GREX is run by and for its users, based on democratic
  consensus and benevolent anarchy.</p>

  <p><br /></p>

  <h3>Please select a topic:</h3><br />

  <ul>
    <li><a href="log.html">Logging In</a></li>

    <li><a href="som.html">Some Helpful Concepts</a></li>

    <li><a href="det.html">Determining Your Terminal Type</a></li>

    <li><a href="if.html">If You Run Into Trouble Logging
    In</a></li>

    <li><a href="want.html">Want to Help Support GREX?</a></li>

    <li><a href="read.html">Reading New Items</a></li>

    <li><a href="add.html">Adding Your Own Response</a></li>

    <li><a href="enter.html">Entering a New Item</a></li>

    <li><a href="see.html">Seeing What's New</a></li>

    <li><a href="find.html">Finding Specific Ideas</a></li>

    <li><a href="fin.html">Finding Other Conferences</a></li>

    <li><a href="leav.html">Leaving GREX</a></li>

    <li><a href="check.html">Checking Activity In a List of
    Conferences</a></li>

    <li><a href="get.html">Getting GREX Help</a></li>

    <li><a href="mod.html">Modifying Your Set-up</a></li>

    <li><a href="scr.html">Screening Out Discussions</a></li>

    <li><a href="se.html">Seeing Who Else is on GREX</a></li>

    <li><a href="lear.html">Learning More About a Specific
    User</a></li>

    <li><a href="ge.html">Getting More Information</a></li>

    <li><a href="some.html">Some Useful Commands</a></li>

    <li><a href="rea.html">Reading Usenet News</a></li>

    <li><a href="use.html">Using Private E-Mail</a></li>

    <li><a href="to.html">To Chat With Another User in
    Real-time</a></li>

    <li><a href="ify.html">If You Don't Want to be "Chatted"
    With</a></li>
  </ul>
</body>
</html>
