<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:carl@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>Hypertext Introduction</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Carl's Introduction to Hypertext</h1>Hypertext means text
  that has words (or icons) highlighted that can be selected.
  Windows help files are hypertext--just double-click a green word
  and you see something else.

  <p>On Grex, the only hypertext we have is in HTML (HyperText
  Markup Language), and it can be viewed by several viewers. Lynx
  is the only viewer running on this system.</p>

  <p>To write HTML hypertext, you just edit a file and add
  commands.</p>

  <blockquote>
    <code>&lt;title&gt;</code>This is the Document's
    Title<code>&lt;/title&gt;</code>
  </blockquote>is an example of what these commands look like.
  Hypertext can contain links to other files, but it doesn't have
  to. Probably the most common commands are:

  <dl>
    <dt>
    <code>&lt;title&gt;</code>...<code>&lt;/title&gt;</code></dt>

    <dd>for the title (appears on top right of screen)</dd>

    <dt><code>&lt;pre&gt;</code>...<code>&lt;/pre&gt;</code></dt>

    <dd>for preformatted text (<code>&lt;pre&gt;</code> makes it
    print the way it appears in the editor--as far as spacing and
    paragraphs go.)</dd>

    <dt><code>&lt;p&gt;</code></dt>

    <dd>for a new paragraph (without <code>&lt;p&gt;</code> or
    <code>&lt;pre&gt;</code>, the whole document will look like one
    paragraph)</dd>

    <dt><code>&lt;h1&gt;</code>...<code>&lt;/h1&gt;</code></dt>

    <dd>for a top header (it prints a centered header in
    capitals)</dd>

    <dt><code>&lt;a
    href=http://www.cyberspace.org/~carl/index.html&gt;</code>My
    Home Page<code>&lt;/a&gt;</code></dt>

    <dd>for a link to another file</dd>
  </dl>If you'd like to try writing a hypertext document, start a
  new file named "myfile.html" with your favorite editor. Put in a
  title and a header, and then type in some text.

  <p>To view this file, type "lynx myfile.html" and you'll see it
  as hypertext. If it doesn't look right, you can edit it from
  within lynx by typing an "e". (This gives you the editor from
  your options page, available by pressing "o".) When you exit the
  editor, you will see what the hypertext looks like.</p>

  <p>Please <a href="mailto:carl">mail carl</a> if you have any
  questions. I like to see people experimenting with hypertext and
  developing their own files.</p>
</body>
</html>
