<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:carl@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>Carl's Intro to the Picospan BBS</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Or: How to be in Two Places at Once</h1>

  <h1>When You Aren't Anywhere at All</h1><br />

  <blockquote>
    Imagine that a friend is leading you to a fabled mansion. A
    large house with personality and charm. The friend walks ahead
    of you slightly, realizes it, and comes back to walk with you.
    On your way there, your friend tells you that there will fun
    conversations with interesting people.

    <p>As you approach the entrance, your friend stops and looks at
    you with a bright smile. "There are two things to remember:
    what room you are in and the topic of the conversation. If you
    can remember both of these, you will have an easy time
    exploring and mingling."</p>

    <p>You step inside the mansion and a kindly gentleman welcomes
    you to the "Agora" room. While thoughts of a marketplace cross
    your mind, the gentleman informs you that there are some new
    threads of conversation. He stands quietly at attention, as if
    waiting for you to say something.</p>

    <p>As you look around, you notice scribes diligently writing
    every word spoken by the guests. After speaking about a topic,
    a guest moves on to another conversation, and the scribes tape
    the pages to other sheets of paper attached to the wall. The
    scribes are quite meticulous. Every conversation must have a
    topic, which is written in finest calligraphy at the top of the
    wall. Taped to this is a conversation starter. These starters
    usually have more pages taped to them.</p>

    <p>It slowly occurs to you that these topics, conversation
    starters and follow-ups are the results of many people--far
    more than could fit in the room at any one time. You begin to
    notice that guests are moving from conversation to
    conversation. Some talk a lot. Some listen carefully. Some
    weigh their words. Some breeze about like a butterfly. You also
    notice that the guests are changing, moving from one room to
    another.</p>

    <p>As you look about the room, you notice the kindly gentleman
    assisting others. You approach him and simply say "help". He
    replies "Okay" and produces for you a list of magical
    words:</p>

    <dl>
      <dt>READ</dt>

      <dd>Allows one to see the transcriptions of the
      conversations.</dd>

      <dt>ENTER</dt>

      <dd>Allows one to make a new topic and conversation
      starter.</dd>

      <dt>BROWSE</dt>

      <dd>Allows one to see the topics in this room.</dd>

      <dt>MAIL</dt>

      <dd>Allows one to send a personal message to another
      guest.</dd>

      <dt>WHO</dt>

      <dd>Allows one to see who else is in the mansion.</dd>

      <dt>BYE</dt>

      <dd>Allows one to leave the mansion.</dd>

      <dt>HELP</dt>

      <dd>Produces a new copy of the list of magic words.</dd>

      <dt>JOIN</dt>

      <dd>Allows one to enter another room.</dd>

      <dt>HELP CONFERENCE</dt>

      <dd>Allows one to see what other rooms are available.</dd>
    </dl>You find it odd that the gentleman will only say "Okay",
    but you don't mind, since he gladly sees that your wishes are
    fulfilled. You try out the magic words, and discover that each
    has a power that you will understand better with time.

    <p>As you glance about the room, curiosity gets the best of
    you. Wanting to be in on the latest conversations, you issue
    the word "READ". To your surprize, a scribe appears who shows
    you a topic and only the part of the conversation that is new.
    As you finish reading, she softly says, "Respond or Pass?" Not
    being sure what to say, you mumble "help".</p>

    <p>The scribe presents you with another list of words. You
    notice the writing is different than your first list, although
    some words appear on both. You look more carefully at the
    dainty scribe's list:</p>

    <dl>
      <dt>RESPOND</dt>

      <dd>Add more to this conversation.</dd>

      <dt>PASS</dt>

      <dd>Skip this conversation and show me the next.</dd>

      <dt>STOP</dt>

      <dd>Quit reading so I can issue one of the other magic
      words.</dd>

      <dt>NEW</dt>

      <dd>Stop, and show me this conversation again next time.</dd>

      <dt>POSTPONE</dt>

      <dd>Pass, and show me this conversation again next time.</dd>

      <dt>HEADER</dt>

      <dd>Remind me of the topic.</dd>

      <dt>ONLY 0</dt>

      <dd>Remind me of the conversation starter.</dd>

      <dt>LAST</dt>

      <dd>Remind me of the last response.</dd>

      <dt>BYE</dt>

      <dd>Leave the mansion.</dd>

      <dt>HELP</dt>

      <dd>Produce a new copy of this list of magic words.</dd>
    </dl>As you finish with the scribe, you look up and notice the
    friend who brought you to the mansion. Your friend reminds you
    about keeping track of what room you are in and what the topic
    for your current conversation is. As if suddenly becoming aware
    of the time, your friend invites you to stay as late as you
    like, since the mansion is open 24 hours a day. You feel
    something being pressed into your hand as your friend says
    goodbye. The charm is delicately engraved with the words "help
    help" on one side and "join info" on the other.

    <p>Enjoy!</p>
  </blockquote>
</body>
</html>
