<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />

  <title>Netiquette</title>
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Guidelines for Responsible Use of the Internet</h1>
  <pre>
 Grex users have an obligation to use Internet access in a
 responsible and informed way, conforming to network etiquette
 (netiquette,) customs, and courtesies. Use of the Internet
 encompasses many different interconnected networks and
 computer systems with each system having its own rules and
 regulations regarding responsible use.
 
 Ultimately, as a user of the Internet and member of the
 Internet community, you are responsible for being aware of,
 and obeying all rules that apply to you.  Keep in mind that
 no set of rules can give you permission to commit acts that
 are illegal; and that you and perhaps Grex could be held
 liable for the consequences of such actions.
 
 As a general rule, users should identify themselves properly
 when using any Internet service. Users should also be careful
 about how they represent themselves, given that what they say
 or do could be interpreted as the opinion or policy of Grex.
 
 The use of the Internet is a privilege, not a right, that may
 be revoked at any time for inappropriate conduct. Examples of
 inappropriate conduct include:
 
 -  placing unlawful information on networks and systems;
 
 -  use of threatening, abusive, or otherwise objectionable 
 language in either public or private messages;
 
 -  sending "chain letters" or "broadcast" messages to lists 
 or individuals; and
 
 -  any activity that could cause congestion or disruption of 
 networks and systems.
 
</pre>Select these links for more netiquette on:

  <ul>
    <li><a href="file:email.html">E-Mail</a></li>

    <li><a href="file:usenet.html">Usenet Discussion
    Groups</a></li>

    <li><a href="file:listserv.html">Listserv Mailing
    Lists</a></li>

    <li><a href="file:telnet.html">Telnet</a></li>

    <li><a href="file:ftp.html">FTP File Transfer</a></li>
  </ul>
  <pre>

-----------------------------------------

 Acknowledgment
 
 In the spirit of the Internet, this information was gleaned 
 from the following source:
 
 http://thomas.loc.gov, who gleaned it from:
 
 The Whole Internet User's Guide &amp; Catalog - Ed Krol, First 
 Edition, September 1992
 
 The Internet Guide for New Users - Daniel Dern, 1994
 
 The NET:User Guidelines and Netiquette - Arlene H. Rinaldi, 
 Computer User Services, Florida Atlantic University

</pre>
</body>
</html>
