<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Having problems logging into Grex?</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Having problems logging into <span id="grex"><em>Grex?</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <p>Many times, problems with logging in can be as simple as an
    incorrectly typed password or login, but sometimes, the reasons
    can be more subtle. The following is a list of messages you might
    see; follow the link to learn more details about each
    message.</p>

    <hr />

    <h2>Common login errors</h2>

    <ul>
      <li><a href="#badlogin"><em>No such loginid</em></a></li>

      <li><a href="#disabled"><em>This loginid disabled</em></a></li>

      <li><a href="#badpassword"><em>Incorrect password</em></a></li>

      <li><a href="#badtime"><em>Invalid login time</em></a></li>

      <li><a href="#badroot"><em>Sorry, root logins not allowed on
      this line</em></a></li>

      <li><a href="#accessdenied"><em>Access Denied</em></a></li>

      <li><a href="#failcount"><em>Excessive login failures for this
      loginid</em></a></li>
    </ul>
    <hr />

    <h3><a id="badlogin">No such loginid</a></h3>
    <p>The login name that you entered does not exist on Grex. Check first
    to be sure you spelled it correctly. Note that your login name
    must be typed in all lower-case letters and numbers.</p>

    <p>If you haven't logged into your Grex account recently, it is
    possible that it has been deleted. It is our practice to remove
    accounts that have not been used for 90 days or more. With more
    than 200 new accounts created on Grex every day, we must delete
    unused accounts to free up resources. Even with this policy, we
    still have over 27,000 active accounts on Grex. You can use the
    form at the bottom of this page to check if an account
    exists.</p>

    <p>If your account was reaped (deleted), feel free to recreate
    the account by logging in as
    <a href="ssh://newuser@grex.org/">newuser</a>. This link requires
    that your browser can start an SSH client.  An alternative is to 
    use the web-based <a href="https://grex.org/mindterm/applet.html">
    MindTerm Java SSH client.</a> We are sorry for the inconvenience. 
    We hope we can welcome you back to Grex.</p>

    <h3><a id="disabled">This loginid disabled</a></h3>
    <p>If you see this, first check to see that you
    typed your loginid in correctly. If your account was locked, you
    will see this message. Generally, this means we saw your account
    being used for an inappropriate purpose. If you want your account
    unlocked, you will need to send mail to <a href=
    "mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a> that says what you did
    wrong, why what you did was wrong, and that you promise not to do
    the bad thing again.</p>

    <h3><a id="badpassword">Incorrect password</a></h3>
    <p>The password you supplied was not correct. You
    may have mistyped or misremembered your password. Case matters,
    so check to be sure that you don't have caps-lock turned on.</p>

    <p>If you have not used your account recently, it may have been
    reaped, and the login name may have been claimed by another
    person. Inactive accounts are reaped (deleted) after 90 days,
    after which it is possible for another person to reuse the same
    login name. You can use the form at the bottom of this page to
    check the owner of the account and see if it is you. If your
    account was reaped, feel free to log in as
    <a href="ssh://newuser@grex.org/">newuser</a> and create a new
    account.  This link requires that your browser can start an
    SSH client.  An alternative is to use the web-based
    <a href="https://grex.org/mindterm/applet.html">MindTerm Java SSH
    client.</a></p>

    <p>If you have used your account recently, and really cannot
    remember the password, please send E-mail to
    <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a> and indicate
    that you have forgotten your password. If you have previously left
    sufficient identifying information with your account that we can
    verify that you are really you, we will reset your password.
    Please do NOT tell us what you think your password is, or was. We
    do not keep a password history, and obviously your present
    password is wrong.</p>

    <p>In fact, please don't ever tell anyone your password, not even
    your best friend or lover. Also, for your protection, don't use
    your grex password on any other system.</p>

    <h3><a id="badtime">Invalid login time</a></h3>
    <p>This message should not occur. Send E-mail to
    <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a> if you believe
    you have seen this error message. Please include the date and
    time you tried it.</p>

    <h3><a id="badroot">Sorry, root logins not allowed
      on this line</a></h3>
    <p>Root access is used by certain grex staff members for system
    maintenance purposes, but only by using <tt>sudo</tt> after logging
    in normally.</p>

    <h3><a id="accessdenied">Access Denied</a></h3>
    <p>This message may occur if your IP address (likely provided by your
    Internet Service Provider dynamically) is on a block or black list.
    Grex subscribes to several IP block or black lists to help prevent
    people from damaging Grex.  Ideally your ISP would do something about
    this because they assigned you an IP address that is known around the
    Internet as engaging in illegal or unethical activities.  Ask them to
    give you a different IP address would be one solution.  Please send E-mail to <a href=
    "mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a> if you see this message and
    Grex staff can determine if your IP address is being blocked for this
    reason.</p>

    <h3><a id="failcount">Excessive login failures for this loginid</a></h3>
    <p>This message should not normally occur.
    If it occurs, it indicates that a person was trying to break into
    your account, and failed. Please send E-mail to <a href=
    "mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a> if you see this message.</p>

    <hr />

    <h3>Check Information about a Grex Account</h3>
    <p>To check if an account exists, or if it is your account, enter the
    login name in the box below and submit it. This will display public
    information about the account if it exists.</p>

    <form action="/cgi-bin/ufinger" method="get" accept-charset="utf-8">
      <p>login: <input type="text" name="u" id="u" />
      <input type="submit" /></p>
    </form>

    <hr />

    <h3>Contact Information</h3>

    <address class="vcard">
      <span class="fn org">Cyberspace Communications, Inc.</span><br />
      <span class="adr">
        <span class="post-office-box">P.O. Box 4432</span><br />
        <span class="locality">Ann Arbor</span>,
          <abbr class="region" title="Michigan">MI</abbr>
        <span class="postal-code">48106-4432</span><br />
        <span class="country-name">USA</span><br />
      </span><br />
      <a class="url" href="faq.xhtml">Grex FAQ</a> -
      <a class="email" href="mailto:help@grex.org">Send email to
        help@grex.org</a>
    </address>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: badlogin.xhtml 1540 2016-06-11 16:25:41Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
