<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Conferencing on Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Conferencing on <span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <p>Conferences (<em>BBS, forums</em>) can be accessed in 3 ways:</p>
  <ol>
     <li>via the Unix shell on the <q>Grex</q> Unix server, by typing:
     <tt>bbs</tt> or <tt>ft</tt> at the shell prompt. To connect
     to the Grex server you need to <strong>SSH</strong> or
     <a href="ssh://grex.org/">ssh with a browser</a>. Note: this
     link will only work if your browser has been
     configured to start a SSH client. If it doesn't
     work, you may need to change your browser's preferences,
     or in some cases, download an <a href="ssh.xhtml">SSH client</a> 
     application program.</li>
     <li>via a web <a href="https://grex.org/cgi-bin/backtalk">browser</a></li>

     <li>by <a href="http://www.unixpapa.com/backtalk/fronttalk/">
     downloading Fronttalk (ft)</a> to your computer and
     running it; this requires some form of Perl to be installed
     (<a href="http://www.activestate.com/activeperl/">ActivePerl</a>, on
     Windows).</li>
  </ol>

  <p>The conferences are the heart of Grex. Since its inception
  in <strong>1991</strong>, Grex has provided conferencing as a way
  for people to get to know each other, exchange ideas and form virtual
  communities based on shared interests.</p>

  <p>There are now a large number of conferences on Grex, covering
  a wide range of topics. A number of these are highlighted on
  <a href="index.xhtml">our front page</a>, but here is <a href=
  "/cgi-bin/backtalk/pistachio/conflist">a complete list</a>.</p>

  <p>These conferences were at first only accessible by dialing
  into Grex and running  <a href=
  "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PicoSpan">Picospan</a> - a software
  developed in <em>1983</em> by a Grex staff member
  (<strong>Marcus D. Watts</strong>).</p>

  <p>Within a few years, Grex added an internet connection which
  permitted users from all over the world to participate in these
  conferences. We now have users from many countries, with many
  different points of view, and many interesting stories to
  tell.</p>

  <p>In <em>1996</em>, when the web became more popular, two other Grex
  Staff members developed the
  <a href="http://www.unixpapa.com/backtalk/">Backtalk</a> conferencing
  system. This further simplifies the process of participating in
  these conferences by making access possible to all of Grex's
  conferences directly from a web browser, with no need to connect
  by SSH. Backtalk is fully compatible with Picospan, and they
  share the same conference database on Grex, so it really makes no
  difference which one you use.</p>

  <p>Eventually, the two Grex Staff members developed the <a href=
  "http://www.unixpapa.com/backtalk/fronttalk">Fronttalk</a> client
  to the Backtalk conferencing system. This further simplifies the
  process of participating in these conferences by making access
  possible to all of Grex's conferences directly from any machine,
  with no need to connect by SSH, just by installing fronttalk.
  Fronttalk looks like Picospan, when running.</p>

  <p>Today, PicoSpan has been retired and replaced by FrontTalk.</p>

  <p>OK, then. Let's <a href="cgi-bin/backtalk">go to the
  conferences</a></p>

  <p>See <a href="history.xhtml">more about Grex's history</a>.</p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: confs.xhtml 1422 2014-03-23 00:56:43Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
