<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>E-mail on Grex</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>E-mail on <span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                               
    <ul>                                                                        
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>  
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>                  
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>  
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>                        
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>         
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>             
    </ul>                                                                       
  </div> 

  <div id="content">
  <p>Grex provides free email accounts to anyone who wants one.
  This service is made available in the spirit of improving
  people's ability to communicate with each other.</p>

  <p>Once you have a validated Grex account, your E-mail address
  is either <strong>accountname@grex.org</strong> or
  <strong>accountname@cyberspace.org</strong>. You may use whichever
  address you prefer.</p>

  <p>Grex offers <strong>POP3 and IMAP E-mail</strong> connections
  for use with an E-mail client supporting either of those protocols.
  Grex requires a secure connection for this to work.  As an example,
  here's how to connect with IMAP from your local computer running
  an e-mail client, such as Thunderbird: Tell your client to use
  <strong>grex.org</strong> or <strong>cyberspace.org</strong> as
  the e-mail server.  Connect on <strong>port 143</strong> with
  <strong>STARTTLS</strong> (SSL/TLS and port 993 will also work)
  for security, and use your Grex username and password to
  authenticate.</p>

  <p>Grex does not support Web-based mail right now.</p>

  <p>You may also use a text terminal to read or send E-mail from Grex.
  To do this, you can <a href="ssh://grex.org">SSH to Grex</a>.
  Note: this link will only work if your browser supports the SSH
  protocol or if your browser has been configured to start an SSH 
  client. If it doesn't work, you may need to change your browser's
  preferences, or in some cases, <a href="ssh.xhtml">download an SSH 
  client application</a> program.</p>

  <p>Once you have connected by SSH and logged in, you can use any of
  the mail clients available on Grex. Currently, we support <tt>alpine,
  elm, mutt, nmh, and mail.</tt> We will consider installing 
  other programs, upon request.</p>

  <p>This process of connecting to read mail can be greatly simplified
  and made more secure by the use of <a href="ssh.xhtml">public-key
  cryptography with SSH</a>. <strong>SSH</strong> is a secure means
  of communication because it uses data encryption.</p>

  <p>E-mail is a very popular service, and so it is necessary for
  Grex to establish an acceptable use policy for E-mail. Ideally,
  we would not like to have many rules, but we have found that we
  need to have a few in order to assure the smooth flow of mail to
  so many users.</p>

  <h3>Acceptable Use Policy for Grex E-mail</h3>

  <ul>
    <li><strong>Do not send unsolicited or unwanted mail</strong>. This
    includes mail intended to harass other users.</li>

    <li>Do not send or encourage anyone to send you messages longer
    than <strong>100k</strong>. Usually mail that large contains an
    attached file, often a binary file. If you must send or receive
    attachments, make sure that they are small and infrequent.</li>

    <li>If you choose to have your mail forwarded to another
    machine, you must limit the forwarding to a single site. Do not
    use the forwarding service to setup a mailing list.</li>

    <li>If forwarding mail, do not forward any bulk mail. Bulk mail
    is mail that comes from a list server. Instead, you must
    unsubscribe your Grex account from the list server, and
    subscribe to the list from where you wish to receive your
    mail.</li>

    <li><strong>Read your mail regularly.</strong> If you are receiving
    mail from a list server that you do not have time to read,
    unsubscribe from the mailing list. If your mailbox gets too big,
    your mail will bounce.</li>
  </ul>

  <p>Users interested in using other mail clients should send email
  to <a href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>.</p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: email.xhtml 1407 2014-03-22 22:21:57Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
