<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Grex Membership FAQ</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Frequently Asked Questions about<br />
    Becoming a Member of <span id="grex"><em>"Grex</em></span></a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">                                                                                                       
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
    <div id="toc">
    <ul>
      <li><a href="#doihaveto">Do I have to become a member in order
      to use Grex?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#whatdoiget">What benefits do I get for becoming a
      member of Grex?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#isthereaform">Is there a form I need to fill out
      to become a member?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#caniusemycc">Can I pay my dues with my credit
      card?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#cccostmore">Does it cost Grex money if I pay by
      credit card?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#taxdeductible">Are my membership dues
      tax-deductible?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#canirunabot">If I become a member, can I run an
      IRC bot such as Eggdrop on Grex?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#canihavepics">If I become a member, can I put
      pictures on my web site?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#doineedid">Do I have to identify myself in order
      to become a member of Grex?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#whydoineedid">Why?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#formsofid">What forms of ID are
      acceptable?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#paypalid">I'm paying for my membership with
      Paypal. Do I still need to send ID?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#howcanisendid">But the whole point of using
      Paypal was I didn't want to send mail! Is there any other way I
      can send the treasurer my ID?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#whoseesmyid">Who will get to see my ID?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#outsideus">I live outside the US and don't have
      access to a US checking account. Can I become a member?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#institutional">Can my organization become a
      member of Grex?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#instid">What kind of ID is needed for an
      institutional membership?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#howsoon">How soon after I send in my payment will
      I be made a member?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#mistakes">Is there anything that might prevent me
      from being added right away?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#howwilliknow">How will I know when my membership
      is activated?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#donations">Can I donate old computer equipment in
      lieu of paying dues?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#canivolunteer">I am an experienced UNIX user. Can
      I do system administration work in lieu of paying
      dues?</a></li>

      <li><a href="#coop">What can I do if I don't like these
      policies?</a></li>
    </ul>
    </div>
  <hr />

  <h3 id="doihaveto">Do I have to become a member in order to use
  Grex?</h3>
    <p>No. Anyone is welcome to join the Grex community, free of
    charge. But about 75% of Grex's operating expenses are paid
    with membership dues, so if you find Grex to be valuable, we
    hope you will consider becoming a member.</p>

  <h3 id="whatdoiget">What benefits do I get for becoming a member of
  Grex?</h3>
    <p>First of all, Grex is not an ISP, and so does not sell Internet
    access. Membership dues are donations to help support Grex, not
    payments for services rendered. Part of Grex's charitable
    mission is to provide limited connectivity for people who
    otherwise couldn't afford it, so we have tried to keep the gap
    between what members can do and what everyone else can do
    small.</p>

    <p>So the real answer is, the main thing you get is the
    satisfaction of supporting a great community, and a great
    community resource. You also get the ability to vote in Grex
    elections, so you can help decide Grex's future. (You have to
    pay for three months or more before you can vote.)</p>

    <p>There are also a few technical advantages to being a member.
    Certain of our Internet resources are too limited to grant to
    everyone who has an account on Grex, so they are reserved for
    members only. Specifically, non-members are forbidden internet
    access except via these protocols: finger, gopher, talk, and
    http. All other internet protocols (such as SSH, FTP, IRC,
    and many more) are reserved for members only.</p>

    <p>These restrictions are implemented with
    <a href="staff/sun/blocks.xhtml">kernel blocks</a>, so even
    if a non-member builds a personal copy of, say, an IRC client, it
    won't run on Grex.</p>

  <h3 id="caniusemycc">Can I pay my dues with my credit card?</h3>
    <p>Yes! Memberships can be purchased through <a href=
    "member.xhtml#CC">Paypal</a>. Of course, you can still just mail
    in a check if you prefer.</p>

  <h3 id="cccostmore">Does it cost Grex money if I pay by credit
  card?</h3>
    <p>Yes, a bit. Paypal charges us a fee to receive money you
    send us - go to <a href=
    "http://www.paypal.com">www.paypal.com</a> and click on "fees"
    at the bottom of the page to see how much. At the time of this
    writing, it's $.30 plus 2.2% for most payments.</p>

    <p>We're willing to pay that fee, but if it bothers you that
    Grex gets less money this way than we would if you sent a
    check, you are of course welcome to increase your payment
    slightly to cover the fee. We would be most grateful.</p>

    <p>Our bank doesn't charge us any fee to deposit checks, money
    orders, or cash.</p>


  <h3 id="isthereaform">Is there a form I need to fill out to become a
  member?</h3>
    <p>No. To become a member, just send in your payment, along with
    your login name and ID (if necessary), and that's all there is
    to it. We try to keep things as form-free as possible, though
    you may need to give us a bit more information if you are
    paying by credit card.</p>

  <h3 id="taxdeductible">Are my membership dues tax-deductible?</h3>
    <p>Yes. Cyberspace Communications is a 501(c)3 corporation, so
    donations to it are tax-deductible. Since the only benefits
    received in return for membership dues are
    frequently-exercisable rights, membership dues are donations
    and therefore deductible in full.</p>

  <h3 id="canirunabot">If I become a member, can I run an IRC bot such
  as Eggdrop on Grex?</h3>
    <p>Yes, if you so choose, but please do not overwhelm our
    system!</p>


  <h3 id="canihavepics">If I become a member, can I put pictures on my
  web site?</h3>

    <p>Users are not allowed to store images on Grex, whether they are
    members or not. (This is because Grex's bandwidth is so
    limited.) However you can store an image somewhere else and
    have it display on your Grex web page. For instance, your page
    could include a line like this:</p>

      <pre>&lt;img src=http://www.somedomain.com/mypic.jpg&gt;</pre>


    <p>As long as the images are stored off of Grex, they
    don't go through our link when a user goes to your page. So a
    reference like the one above is just fine.</p>


  <h3 id="doineedid">Do I have to identify myself in order to become
  a member of Grex?</h3>

    <p>Yes. Although you are welcome to use Grex anonymously, or
    donate money anonymously, you must send some ID to the
    treasurer in order to become a member.</p>

  <h3 id="whydoineedid">Why?</h3>
    <p>There are two reasons Grex requires ID from its members:</p>

    <ol>
      <li>While we are very comfortable allowing anonymous users
      access to Grex, we are not comfortable unleashing them on the
      rest of the Internet. It would be irresponsible of the Grex
      administration to allow people we can't identify to SSH
      through Grex to other systems, so we require ID from everyone
      we allow to do that.</li>

      <li>Cyberspace Communications is required by the State of
      Michigan to maintain an up-to-date list of members. Implied
      in this requirement is that we make sure no two memberships
      are held by the same person. So we require ID to connect
      accounts with real people and make sure no one has the
      ability to vote twice in Grex elections.</li>
    </ol>

  <h3 id="formsofid">What forms of ID are acceptable?</h3>
    <p>First of all, if you pay with a personal check that has your
    name pre-printed on it, that's good enough right there. You
    don't need to include any extra ID. If you're a minor and your
    parent or guardian writes the check, we'll accept that as ID.</p>

    <p>If you pay with cash or a money order, include a photocopy
    of a driver's license, passport, or other official ID. If you
    don't have a driver's license or passport, but do have
    something, send mail to the <a href=
    "mailto:treasurer@grex.org">treasurer</a> and ask if your ID is
    OK.</p>


  <h3 id="paypalid">I'm paying for my membership with Paypal. Do I
  still need to send ID?</h3>

    <p>It depends. If you are a <em>verified member</em> of Paypal,
    then you don't need to send Grex ID. Otherwise, you do. Paypal
    verification is different depending on what country you're in;
    verified members in the US have confirmed their ownership of a
    bank account. For more information on Paypal verification
    <a href="http://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=p/gen/verification-faq-outside">
    Click here</a>.</p>


  <h3 id="howcanisendid">But the whole point of using Paypal
  was I didn't want to send mail! Is there any other way I can send
  the treasurer my ID?</h3>
  <p>Yes. There are three ways to submit ID:</p>
  <ol>
   <li>Scan your ID and email the scan to
      <a href="mailto:treasurer@grex.org">treasurer@grex.org</a>.</li>

   <li>Show your ID to the treasurer in person. (This is
      probably not practical unless you live in Ann Arbor.)</li>

   <li>Photocopy the ID and send the copy to:
    <address class="vcard">
      <span class="fn org">Cyberspace Communications, Inc.</span><br />
      <span class="adr">
        <span class="post-office-box">P.O. Box 4432</span><br />
        <span class="locality">Ann Arbor</span>,          <abbr class="region" title="Michigan">MI</abbr>
        <span class="postal-code">48106-4432</span><br />
        <span class="country-name">USA</span><br />
      </span><br />   
    </address></li>
   </ol>


  <h3 id="whoseesmyid">Who will get to see my ID?</h3>
   <p> All the information about members' names, addresses, and other
    ID data is available only to the treasurer and is not stored on
    the net. The list of the usernames of people who are members is
    in a publicly readable file, however. (So for instance, suppose
    someone named Dave White, whose Grex username is "waffles",
    becomes a member. Anyone at all can read the membership list
    and find that "waffles" is a member. However, if Mr. White so
    chooses, he needn't let anyone but the treasurer know the real
    name of the owner of account "waffles".)</p>

    <p>Needless to say, we never sell mailing lists or anything
    like that.</p>

    <p>Note: Most people who become members aren't at all worried
    about concealing their identity. So by default, the treasurer
    publicly thanks new members using both their real names and
    their usernames. If you're concerned about anonymity and don't
    want your real name used, be sure to tell the treasurer that
    when you first send in dues money.</p>


  <h3 id="outsideus">I live outside the U.S. and don't have access to a
  U.S. dollar checking account. Can I become a member?</h3>
    <p>If you have a MasterCard or Visa, you may be able to pay for
    your membership using <a href="member.xhtml#CC">Paypal</a>.
    Otherwise this can be a real problem. We're sorry we can't
    accept payment in any currency other than U.S. dollars.</p>

    <p>Here are a few things which have worked for people in the
    past. Note all of these methods require that you <a href=
    "#howcanisendid">submit ID</a>.</p>

    <ul>
      <li>Find a bank that does business in the U.S. and ask for a
      draft in U.S. dollars. Citibank and First of America are
      examples of U.S. Banks.</li>

      <li>Request a draft in dollars from the Bank of India.</li>

      <li>Have a friend in the U.S. send us money, and reimburse
      him or her through other channels. For instance, we had one
      user who was an Indian living in the U.S., and he said he'd
      pay Grex money if people in India would give money to his
      sister.</li>

      <li>Use an international money order. Unfortunately we've
      heard this is expensive.</li>

      <li>Send a MoneyGram. This is also expensive, but it
      works.</li>

      <li>Send Cash money. We don't recommend this, of course,
      because there's absolutely nothing anyone can do about it if
      it doesn't make it here safely. But people have used this
      method successfully.</li>
    </ul>

    <p>If you have any other ideas we can add to this list, send
    mail to the <a href="mailto:treasurer@grex.org">treasurer</a>.</p>


  <h3 id="institutional">Can my organization become a member of
  Grex?</h3>
    <p>Yes. Institutions may become members of Grex. They have the
    same privileges as individual members, with the exception that
    they may not vote in Grex elections or serve on the Grex Board
    of Directors. This is to keep any one person from obtaining
    more than one vote in any election.</p>

    <p>It should be noted that while incidental use of Grex for
    commercial purposes is OK, Grex is not an appropriate platform
    for serious business ventures. A few of the reasons why
    are:</p>

    <ul>
      <li>Grex is run entirely by volunteers. They do a fine job of
      maintaining the system, but they can't be counted on to jump
      when you say jump (or to move at "the speed of
      business.")</li>

      <li>Grex's budget is tiny compared to all but the smallest of
      commercial ventures. A business that's doing any volume at
      all would do well to invest in a commercial ISP account.</li>

      <li>Grex memberships are not contracts for services, they are
      donations. Since Grex is run democratically, the benefits of
      membership are decided by the members. So far in Grex's
      history the membership has been very conservative about
      changing Grex policy on things like membership benefits, and
      it's likely that will continue to be so. But you should be
      aware of the possibility that it might not always be so.</li>
    </ul>

    <p>That said, if you just want to use Grex occasionally to
    sell a few things, it's OK. And we would, of course, appreciate
    your support.</p>


  <h3 id="instid">What kind of ID is needed for an institutional
  membership?</h3>
    <p>Institutions that become members need to designate a contact
    person who is responsible for use of the account. The contact
    person needs to submit his or her ID, which must meet the same
    criteria as the ID of individual members. (See <a href=
    "#formsofid">What forms of ID are acceptable</a>. Personal
    checks count as ID, but corporate checks do not.) The
    institution is responsible for making sure the contact person
    and his or her ID stay up to date. In other words, let us know
    if the contact person changes.</p>


  <h3 id="howsoon">How soon after I send in my payment will I be made a
  member?</h3>
    <p>Grex's mail goes to a P.O. box, and then the treasurer picks it
    up. So add a few days to the time it takes for a letter to get
    from where you are to Ann Arbor in order to estimate the delay.</p>

    <p>Once the treasurer receives your mail, you should be added
    to the membership rolls as soon as possible.</p>

    <p>If you pay using <a href="member.xhtml#CC">Paypal</a>, you'll
    be added as soon as you send in ID.  Note: a VERIFIED
    PayPal account (the definition of which varies by country) can
    constitute valid ID. See <a href="member.xhtml#CC">the Member
    page</a> for why you either need to verify your PayPal account or 
    send valid ID.</p>


  <h3 id="mistakes">Is there anything that might prevent me from being
  added right away?</h3>
    <p>Your membership might be delayed if:</p>

    <ul>
      <li>You pay by <a href="member.xhtml#CC">Paypal</a>, money
      order or with cash and forget to include a photocopy of some
      form of ID.</li>

      <li>You forget to include your Grex username somewhere in
      your letter. (Writing it on the check or sending email to the
      treasurer work nicely.)</li>
    </ul>


  <h3 id="howwilliknow">How will I know when my membership is
  activated?</h3>
    <p>You should get email from the treasurer when you are added to
    the membership rolls.</p>


  <h3 id="donations">Can I donate old computer equipment in lieu of
  paying dues?</h3>
    <p>No thank you.  We are no longer looking for old computer
    equipment.  As hardware has decreased in cost <strong>and</strong>
    increased in power, and open source software has matured, we find
    that we no longer have to be bottom feeders in the way we once
    were.</p>

    <p>Further, it is longstanding Grex policy that you can't pay
    for a membership with equipment, only money. Sorry! We have
    made only one or two exceptions to this over the history of
    Grex. The main purpose of membership dues is to provide cash to
    pay the regular expenses (such as phone bills and co-location
    costs) that operating Grex incurs. We've decided, therefore,
    to stay away from accepting alternative payments for
    memberships.</p>


  <h3 id="canivolunteer">I am an experienced UNIX user. Can I do system
  administration work in lieu of paying dues?</h3>
    <p>We are always delighted to have new volunteers. One of the
    things that Grex needs most urgently is more people to answer
    "help" requests. We recommend you check out the <a href=
    "cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Ahelpers">helpers conference</a>. Also
    you should read the <a href="staff/">Grex Staff Notes</a>.</p>

    <p>However, as with donations of hardware, volunteering for the
    staff cannot be used to pay for membership. (Even longtime
    staff people have to pay dues to be members.) Again, membership
    dues generate the money we need to pay the bills to keep Grex
    running, so we stay away from giving out memberships to anyone
    who doesn't pay.</p>


  <h3 id="coop">What can I do if I don't like these policies?</h3>
    <p>Grex is a democratic institution, and all its policies are
    ultimately decided by the membership. If you think a policy
    should be changed, enter an item in the
    <a href="cgi-bin/backtalk/peek%3Acoop">coop conference</a>
    suggesting the change. If enough people agree with you, you'll
    get what you want. (And if they don't, you'll find out why.)</p>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: memfaq.xhtml 1442 2014-03-23 17:39:07Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
