<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="author" content="grex.org" />

  <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico" type="image/x-icon" />

  <script type="text/javascript"></script>

  <style type="text/css" media="screen">
    @import "style/default.css";
  </style>

  <title>Free Grex Shell Accounts</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="wrap">
  <div id="header">
    <h1><a>Free <span id="grex"><em>Grex</em></span> Shell Accounts</a></h1>
  </div>
  <div id="menu">
    <ul>
      <li class="first"><a href="http://grex.org/" accesskey="1">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="grex.xhtml" accesskey="2">About Us</a></li>
      <li><a href="newuser/index.xhtml" accesskey="3">Get a Free Account</a></li>
      <li><a href="faq.xhtml" accesskey="4">FAQ</a></li>
      <li><a href="member.xhtml" accesskey="5">Become a Member</a></li>
      <li><a href="contact.xhtml" accesskey="6">Contact Us</a></li>
    </ul>
  </div>

  <div id="content">
  <h1><span style="color: red;">(Note: Grex does not allow bots of
  ANY kind)</span></h1>

  <p>Anyone can obtain a free shell account on <q>Grex</q>. There are
  many shells available to choose from. To get an account, just use
  ssh to connect to grex.org and log in as <tt>newuser</tt>. If you
  cannot get connected, see Grex's <a href="ssh.xhtml">SSH information
  page</a>.  An alternative way to create your account is to select
  the <a href="/newuser/">"Get A Free Account"</a> link, either
  here, or on the main page. You will still need to be able to
  <strong>SSH</strong> in order to use it. Either way, you will need
  to fill out a form which takes a few minutes, and then wait a few
  minutes while the account is created on-line. It will be ready for
  use without further delay, but will be relatively useless until it
  has been validated.</p>

  <p>Grex is a popular site, and can become overloaded some times
  during the day.  Please do not log on more than one session at a
  time.</p>

  <p>There are <em>important limitations</em> to Grex accounts,
  which you should note before you get your account.</p>

  <ul>
    <li>Outgoing internet access is blocked for free accounts. So
    <strong><span style="color: red;">you won't be able to use ssh
    or FTP</span></strong>. Certain ports remain unblocked, so that
    you can <a href="browse.xhtml">access the web via lynx</a> or use
    <em>finger, talk, or whois</em>. You cannot overcome these blocks
    by replacing client programs.</li>

    <li>You may feel free to use Grex's software development
    tools, but do not bring a copy of a program to Grex from an
    internet archive without checking with the Grex Staff (<a
    href="mailto:help@grex.org">help@grex.org</a>) first.</li>

    <li>Some diagnostic programs have been abused and are available
    on a limited basis - these include <em>ping, nmap and
    traceroute</em>.</li>

    <li>Programs will not run on Grex after you have logged out
    - they will be killed automatically. Daemon programs are not
    allowed and will be killed.</li>

    <li><em>Abandoned accounts are deleted after three months</em>
    without a log in. It does not matter whether you have a web
    page or whether you are using your account to forward mail.
    Regardless, you must log in so that we know that you are still
    using your account. Using <a href="/cgi-bin/backtalk">Backtalk</a>
    is treated the same as logging in.</li>

    <li>You have <strong>100 megabytes</strong> of disk storage. This
    is enforced by the honor system, so please cooperate.</li>

    <li>Do not use your account to harass or attack others.  Sending
    unwanted mail and attempting to break into another person's
    account are not acceptable, and will not be tolerated.</li>

  </ul>
  </div>

</div>
<div id="footer">
  <span id="revision">$Id: shell.xhtml 1418 2014-03-23 00:48:18Z kentn $</span>
  <span id="feedback">We welcome your
    <a href="mailto:webmaster@grex.org">feedback</a>.</span>
</div>
</body>
</html>
