<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>bbsed introduction</title>
</head>

<body>
  <pre>
Item 11: bbsed - a simple editor for the novice user
Entered by Dave Lovelace (davel) on Thu, Nov 26, 1992 (22:12):
 
 
 If you're new to Unix systems, you may find vi and jove intimidating until
 you've had a chance to play with them.  Until then, you may want to stick
 with a simpleminded editor that's basically what you use to enter items.
 It's called bbsed.  If you want to edit a file (including creating one),
 from a Picospan (conference) prompt you would type
 
 !bbsed filename
 
 where "filename" is replaced by the name of the file you want to edit.
 If this is a new file, you'll find yourself ready to enter text.  If it's
 not, you'll get a prompt for an editor command.  To get help (such as it
 is), enter a question mark (?) - a few more commands are available by
 entering ampersand (&amp;) - at the beginning of a line (all by itself).
 You must do this at the editor command prompt; if you're entering text,
 first enter a line consisting only of a period.
 
 This is not a really powerful editor, &amp; editing any big chunks of text
 is (IMHO) more trouble than learning to use vi.  For editing a short
 list of short lines (as a .cflist) it's just fine.
 Use "." or ^D to end.
 
 Here are the commands, as the help features give them to you.
 
 Edit command (? for help): # means optional line number
 
 c      - continue with next line
 a      - abandon the text you've typed (or use "q")
 s      - send text and quit (or use "w")
 d #    - delete line #
 i #    - insert before line #
 e #    - edit line #
 l #    - list from line # with numbers
 p #    - print from line # without numbers
 
 Type &amp; for more commands
 
 Edit command (? for help): More commands:
 
 r      - read a UNIX file into buffer
 u      - continue in upload mode
 f #    - find a string starting at line #
 !cmd   - execute UNIX command "cmd"
 
 Commands and responses may be combined
    with ";". Example: e12;us;them;p
 
 Be aware that the "edit" command (e) lets you replace a string in a given
 line with another string, as the example shows.  Nothing more powerful.
 But you can learn all the commands in about 3 minutes, unlike everything
 else available.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
