<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta name="generator" content=
  "HTML Tidy for OpenBSD (vers 1 September 2005), see www.w3.org" />
  <link rev="made" href="mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org" />

  <title>Lynx Tips Menu</title>
</head>

<body>
  <pre>
These are some things I have done with lynx that make it a bit easier
to use.  All of the following are optional--if you find they make lynx
easier to use, go for it; if not, they do no permanent damage.

Feel free to <a href=
"mailto:webmaster@cyberspace.org">mail webmaster@cyberspace.org</a> if you have any questions.


Selecting an editor:

    Most people have their own favorite <a href=
"editor.html">editor</a>.  (See the discussions
    in the info conference if you doubt this.)  Since many are available
    and I don't want to unduly influence people, I will simply let you
    pick your favorite.  However, for new people, I will recommend
    "pico" until you feel ready to learn another.

    Press "o" and you will see the options menu.
    Press "e" to select the editor.
    Backspace (if needed to erase former option).
    Type the name of your editor.
    Press your "enter" key.
    Type "&gt;" to save it.

    Notice that if you don't save it, you can try out an editor without
    it becoming your permanent one.


Making your own menu:

    By adding <a href=
"bookmks.html">bookmarks</a>, you can make your own list of choices to see.
    Simply press "a" and answer "y" to add the file you are viewing
    to your <a href="bookm_file.html">bookmark file</a>.


Using your own menu:

    Press "v" (to "view") and select one.

    You may <a href="editor.html">edit</a> your <a href=
"bookm_file.html">bookmark file</a> by pressing "e" as you view it.


Adding your home directory:

    Follow these <a href=
"home_dir.html">steps to add your home directory</a> to your <a href="bookm_file.html">bookmark file</a>.


Making a homepage file:

    <a href=
"lynxexec:mkhomepage">mkhomepage</a> is a new easy way to create a homepage for the World Wide Web.
You will receive a new prototype homepage which you can edit.  Most people
include a little bit of personal information and/or a listing of their
favorite links.

    Select this to <a href=
"lynxexec:lynx%20$HOME/www/index.html">view a homepage</a> which was created by mkhomepage. Once there,
type "e" to edit or "q" to return to this screen.  (Warning: This
will take a looooong time to start up.)

    If you would like to learn more about HTML, the language used
to create Web pages, select <a href=
"http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/General/Internet/WWW/HTMLPrimer.html">here</a>.
</pre>
</body>
</html>
